 Patients were randomly assigned no adjuvant treatment (control group) or an immediate postoperative intraportal infusion of 500mg/m fluorouracil plus 5000 units heparin in 1 L 5% glucose per 24 h for 7 consecutive days (days 1-7) plus 10 mg/m mitomycin in a single dose on day 1. In 41 patients (17-4%) treatment was assigned but not given because of surgery-related problems (7), difficulties with catheter placement (7), other technical problems (14), patient refusal (2), and various other reasons (11). 1 patient in each group died of myocardial infarction, 2 patients in the control group died of refractory small-bowel obstruction, and 3 patients in each group died of antibiotic-resistant gram-negative septicaemia. Transient leucopenia (<3 X10 white blood cells per L) developed in 6 patients during adjuvant chemotherapy, and the white-blood-cell count was significantly lower on postoperative days 7 and 10 in the infusion group than in the control group.  This trial evaluated the hypothesis that adjuvant portal chemotherapy delivered during surgery and during the early postoperative period would reduce the incidence of liver metastasis and increase survival in patients with colorectal cancer. We did find, however, a consistent reduction of all kinds of tumour recurrences that resulted in a significant advantage in overall survival and disease-free survival for patients  treated with adjuvant portal infusion, confirming previous findings.  Previous investigations, with the exception of one, have shown improvements in overall and disease-free survival  and a reduction in the frequency of liver recurrences, especially in the subgroups of colon  cancer patients and of those with tumour-involved regional lymph nodes (Dukes C). Two as yet unpublished meta-analyses of all randomised trials comparing portal adjuvant chemotherapy with a no-treatment control group have been conducted by the European Organization on Research and Treatment of Cancer and the Oxford Colorectal Cancer Cooperative Group.  Deaths attributable to portal adjuvant chemotherapy have been reported in at least three trials: 1 in Taylor et alÿ¿¿¿¿¿s study due to perirectal sepsis, 1 in Fielding and colleagues' study (a patient more than 80 years old), and 1 in our trial (an insulin-dependent diabetic man who had gram-negative septicaemia and leucopenia during portal infusion). This low incidence of surgical complications suggests advances in surgical technique and in patient management before and after elective cancer surgery, that allow safe use of adjuvant chemotherapy soon after surgical intervention.  Based on previous results and our own findings, the Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research decided to accept perioperative adjuvant chemotherapy as the standard treatment for further clinical trials in colorectal cancer.
