
   MAJOR ADVANCES in breast cancer throughout the past decade have included the widespread introduction of combination and  multimodality treatments and the development of new agents such as doxorubicin and tamoxifen. 
   In  1980, we initiated a prospective comparison of the most active standard agent for breast cancer, doxorubicin, and  mitoxantrone as therapy for minimally pretreated patients with breast cancer. 
   Women with metastatic or unresectable regional breast cancer were eligible for this study if they had received no more than  one prior chemotherapy regimen, they had not received anthracyclines, and their previous therapy had failed. They were then randomized  to receive either doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) or mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2) as initial treatment. Patients were interviewed by a research nurse and their physician before each therapy, and any interim effects possibly  related to therapy were recorded as toxicities. 
   Patients were considered evaluable for response if they completed two courses of therapy or showed documented disease  progression at any time. Partial response required a 50% decrease in all lesions that persisted for at least one full course of  therapy. Coombes et al have shown good  correlation between relief of bone pain in patients with breast cancer and response in nonosseous sites using standard Union  Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC) criteria. 
   Two patients were entered on the  mitoxantrone arm and one on doxorubicin without measurable disease and were therefore not eligible. It is too early to  evaluate one patient receiving initial mitoxantrone, and two patients chose not to return after the first course although  neither had serious toxicity or subjective disease progression. Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. Thirty-nine patients initially treated with doxorubicin and 40 initially treated  with mitoxantrone therefore received two full courses of therapy. Response rates are reported for all eligible patients and  for patients completing two full courses of therapy. Three patients had refused standard regimens for breast cancer and  entered this study without prior therapy. Table 2 shows the patient response to both primary treatment and secondary treatment (after crossover).  The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicin and 17% with mitoxantrone. If only patients who received two full courses of therapy are considered, the response  rates to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin are 23% and 33%, respectively. Again the response rates (mitoxantrone, 21%, doxorubicin, 10%) were not  significantly different for the two agents. Overall response rates (primary and secondary treatment) are the same (22% v  25%). 
   This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. Doxorubicin was chosen because it is the most  active standard agent in breast cancer. The complete and partial response rates to these agents are similar, and observed  differences are not statistically significant. If all eligible patients in our study were considered in the analysis of  patient response, the trend would favor doxorubicin (17% v 30%), but the difference is still not significant (P = .17). 
   Yap and colleagues reported a 22% overall response rate in 31 patients with  highly refractive breast cancer who were treated with mitoxantrone at a dosage of 4 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days each  month. Their response rate was 35%, including six patients showing a complete response. 