

Advanced breast cancer, however, is not curable, and survival is inadequate in terms of both 
quality and duration." 


Women with metastatic or unresectable regional breast cancer were eligible for this study if they
had received no more than  one prior chemotherapy regimen, they had not received anthracyclines, and
their previous therapy had failed. Increasing shortness of breath in the presence of a changing and
abnormal  gated acquisition (MUGA) scan (< 0.50) or systolic time interval (STI) measurements (AD _
28%) or a physician's clinical  diagnosis of probable congestive heart failure (CHF) were designated
as drug-related CHF. 


Coombes et al have shown good  correlation between relief of bone pain in patients with breast
cancer and response in nonosseous sites using standard Union  Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC)
criteria. We have chosen to use pain as a response end point since palliation is an important goal
in this setting and the randomized  design helps alleviate bias that might result from using
subjective end points. We have chosen more stringent criteria for  pain relief than those used by
Coombes et al and require complete and durable relief of pain before designation of a  response. The
statistical analysis of frequency data relied on Yate's corrected  chi-square test or Fisher's exact
test when the total number of observations was <= 20.


Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete two courses
because of disease progression or toxicity. Overall response rates (primary and secondary treatment)
are the same (22% v  25%). 


This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side
effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with
CMF. Doxorubicin was chosen because it is the most  active standard agent in breast cancer. 


We are aware of no other reported direct comparative study of these two agents, though two larger
studies are presently being  conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group and the Lederle Collaborative
Study Group. Their regimen was similar to ours,  but they used a slightly higher starting dose. 


Although the crossover design of this study makes it impossible to attribute observed cardiac 
toxicity to either agent, the incidence of CHF is more than might be expected with doxorubicin
alone.


Questions regarding  dosing, scheduling, and the optimum use of mitoxantrone have yet to be
explored. 
