Ninety patients with breast cancer refractory to cyclophosphamide/fluorouracil/methotrexate (CMF) have been randomized in their treatment, receiving either doxorubicin or mitoxantrone. Two of 22 (10%) patients receiving doxorubicin and five of 24 (21%) receiving mitoxantrone as secondary therapy responded. Patients presenting with symptomatic disease can now obtain substantial relief through firstline chemotherapy, and some patients probably live longer as a result of treatment. In 1980, we initiated a prospective comparison of the most active standard agent for breast cancer, doxorubicin, and mitoxantrone as therapy for minimally pretreated patients with breast cancer. Patients must have had measurable or evaluable disease. Patients with liver and renal dysfunction were not excluded. Coombes et al have shown good correlation between relief of bone pain in patients with breast cancer and response in nonosseous sites using standard Union Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC) criteria. 

RESULTS 

Patient characteristics are presented in Table 1. Ninety patients entered the study. Two patients were entered on the mitoxantrone arm and one on doxorubicin without measurable disease and were therefore not eligible. It is too early to evaluate one patient receiving initial mitoxantrone, and two patients chose not to return after the first course although neither had serious toxicity or subjective disease progression. Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving doxorubicin failed to complete two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. These patients have however been designated as having progressive disease. Thirty-nine patients initially treated with doxorubicin and 40 initially treated with mitoxantrone therefore received two full courses of therapy. Response rates are reported for all eligible patients and for patients completing two full courses of therapy. All patients were evaluable for nonhematologic toxicity. Three patients had refused standard regimens for breast cancer and entered this study without prior therapy. Table 2 shows the patient response to both primary treatment and secondary treatment (after crossover). The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicin and 17% with mitoxantrone. One patient had a complete response to each agent. If only patients who received two full courses of therapy are considered, the response rates to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin are 23% and 33%, respectively. Seven of 46 patients who received either agent as secondary therapy (after crossover) had a response. Responses were seen within two courses for most patients, although two patients on each regimen received four or five courses before a response was noted. Pain relief was the sole criterion of response for three patients receiving doxorubicin and one receiving mitoxantrone. More patients treated with mitoxantrone (17%) required an escalation of the dose to achieve the desired level of myelosuppression than did patients treated with doxorubicin (8%). 


DISCUSSION 

This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. Smyth and colleagues treated 134 breast cancer patients with mitoxantrone at 17 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks as primary therapy. Their response rate was 35%, including six patients showing a complete response.
