MAJOR ADVANCES in breast cancer throughout the past decade have included the widespread introduction of combination and  multimodality treatments and the development of new agents such as doxorubicin and tamoxifen. 

Patients presenting with  symptomatic disease can now obtain substantial relief through firstline chemotherapy, and some patients probably live longer  as a result of treatment. 

Advanced breast cancer, however, is not curable, and survival is inadequate in terms of both  quality and duration." 

The therapies presently available for patients for whom first-line therapy has failed offer minimal,  if any, clinical benefits. 

There is clearly a need for new approaches and new agents for therapy for this disease.

Several bis-substituted anthraquinones were introduced into clinical trials about 5 years ago as an entirely new class of  anticancer agents. 

Dihydroxyanthracenedione (mitoxantrone) has emerged as the most promising of this group of agents. 

In  1980, we initiated a prospective comparison of the most active standard agent for breast cancer, doxorubicin, and  mitoxantrone as therapy for minimally pretreated patients with breast cancer. 

Early results of that study were published 2  years ago both in abstract form and in a preliminary manuscript. 

This is the final report of that study.

PATIENTS AND METHODS.

Women with metastatic or unresectable regional breast cancer were eligible for this study if they had received no more than  one prior chemotherapy regimen, they had not received anthracyclines, and their previous therapy had failed. 

Patients were  required to be ambulatory for at least half a waking day (scoring from 0 to 2 on the Zubrod Activity Scale), though patients  who had a greater restriction of activity owing to bone pain alone were permitted if they could otherwise be up and about.  

Patients must have had measurable or evaluable disease. 

Patients with liver and renal dysfunction were not excluded. 

All  patients granted written consent after being informed of the experimental nature of the therapies. 

They were then randomized  to receive either doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) or mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2) as initial treatment. 

Patients with compromised bone  marrow reserve (WBC count < 3000//4L or platelets < 100,000//L) received an initial dose that was reduced by 25%. 

Doses were  repeated every 3 weeks and increased by 25% until the patient achieved a WBC nadir of 5 2,500//L. 

Patients with prolonged or  life-threatening marrow suppression or severe nonhematologic toxicity (World Health Organization grade 3 or 48) had their  dose reduced by 25% to 50%. 

A crossover design was also used, patients who experienced disease progression after two courses  or those who failed to respond to four courses received the alternate regimen. 

Mitoxantrone was initially supplied by the  Investigational Drug Branch of the CTEP, National Cancer Institute, and later by the American Cyanamid Company, Pearl River,  NY. 

Patients were interviewed by a research nurse and their physician before each therapy, and any interim effects possibly  related to therapy were recorded as toxicities. 

Increasing shortness of breath in the presence of a changing and abnormal  gated acquisition (MUGA) scan (< 0.50) or systolic time interval (STI) measurements (AD _ 28%) or a physician's clinical  diagnosis of probable congestive heart failure (CHF) were designated as drug-related CHF. 

Either MUGA scans or STI  measurements were scheduled before therapy, at least every three courses, and at crossover. 

Complete blood counts were  obtained weekly.

Patients were considered evaluable for response if they completed two courses of therapy or showed documented disease  progression at any time. 

Complete response was defined as the disappearance of all evidence of disease for at least one  course of therapy. 

Partial response required a 50% decrease in all lesions that persisted for at least one full course of  therapy. 

Complete relief of pain in the absence of analgesics for at least 4 weeks was accepted as a partial response if the  pain was clearly cancer related and had initially required analgesic therapy for relief. 

Coombes et al have shown good  correlation between relief of bone pain in patients with breast cancer and response in nonosseous sites using standard Union  Internationale Contre le Cancer (UICC) criteria. 

We have chosen to use pain as a response end point since palliation is an important goal in this setting and the randomized  design helps alleviate bias that might result from using subjective end points. 

We have chosen more stringent criteria for  pain relief than those used by Coombes et al and require complete and durable relief of pain before designation of a  response. 

The duration of response was calculated from the date of the initial response. 

Effusions, inflammatory skin  lesions, sclerotic bone lesions, and laboratory abnormalities were not accepted as evaluable lesions. 

Response determinations  were initially made by the patient's physician and a research nurse. 

They were then confirmed by at least one of the  investigators in a blinded review of response data. 

The statistical analysis of frequency data relied on Yate's corrected  chi-square test or Fisher's exact test when the total number of observations was <= 20.

RESULTS.

Patient characteristics are presented in Table 1. 

Ninety patients entered the study. 

Two patients were entered on the  mitoxantrone arm and one on doxorubicin without measurable disease and were therefore not eligible. 

It is too early to  evaluate one patient receiving initial mitoxantrone, and two patients chose not to return after the first course although  neither had serious toxicity or subjective disease progression. 

Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. 

These patients have however been  designated as having progressive disease. 

Thirty-nine patients initially treated with doxorubicin and 40 initially treated  with mitoxantrone therefore received two full courses of therapy. 

Response rates are reported for all eligible patients and  for patients completing two full courses of therapy. 

All patients were evaluable for nonhematologic toxicity. 

Courses were  evaluable for hematologic toxicity if weekly interim blood counts were obtained. 

The initial performance status was near  normal (Zubrod 0 to 1) in about 75% of the patients. 

Three patients had refused standard regimens for breast cancer and  entered this study without prior therapy. 

Patients were equally distributed between the two arms by performance status,  interval from diagnosis to treatment, types of prior treatment, responses to prior treatment, sites of metastases, and number  of metastatic sites. 

Table 2 shows the patient response to both primary treatment and secondary treatment (after crossover).  

The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicin and 17% with mitoxantrone. 

One  patient had a complete response to each agent. 

The 95% confidence intervals overlapped, and the differences were not  statistically significant (P < .2). 

If only patients who received two full courses of therapy are considered, the response  rates to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin are 23% and 33%, respectively. 

Seven of 46 patients who received either agent as  secondary therapy (after crossover) had a response. 

Again the response rates (mitoxantrone, 21%, doxorubicin, 10%) were not  significantly different for the two agents. 

Overall response rates (primary and secondary treatment) are the same (22% v  25%). 

The response sites are shown in Table 3, they were similar for both agents. 

Responses were seen within two courses for  most patients, although two patients on each regimen received four or five courses before a response was noted. 

Pain relief  was the sole criterion of response for three patients receiving doxorubicin and one receiving mitoxantrone. 

Response  durations and time to progression are presented in Table 4 and are also similar. 

Responses lasted for about 3 months in most  patients but continued for more than a year in some.

Table 5 shows that the hematologic toxicity of these drugs was not notably different. 

More patients treated with mitoxantrone  (17%) required an escalation of the dose to achieve the desired level of myelosuppression than did patients treated with  doxorubicin (8%). 

Table 6 shows the frequency and median grade of the more common, nonhematologic toxic reactions. 

Nausea and  vomiting (P < .001), alopecia (P < .001), and fatigue (P < .05) occurred less frequently as a result of treatment with  mitoxantrone and tended to be less severe. 

Symptoms suggestive of CHF developed in seven patients, and four others  experienced a deterioration in cardiac function by noninvasive measurements without clinical failure (Table 7). 

In all cases,  failure was easily controlled or required no therapy.

DISCUSSION.

This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. 

Doxorubicin was chosen because it is the most  active standard agent in breast cancer. 

The complete and partial response rates to these agents are similar, and observed  differences are not statistically significant. 

Time to progression and the duration of remissions were almost identical for  these agents in both primary and secondary treatment. 

However, if tested on a sufficient number of patients, there is a trend  favoring doxorubicin that may prove significant. 

If all eligible patients in our study were considered in the analysis of  patient response, the trend would favor doxorubicin (17% v 30%), but the difference is still not significant (P = .17).

We are aware of no other reported direct comparative study of these two agents, though two larger studies are presently being  conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group and the Lederle Collaborative Study Group. 

Still the responses seen in our study  are consistent with findings reported by others. 

Yap and colleagues reported a 22% overall response rate in 31 patients with  highly refractive breast cancer who were treated with mitoxantrone at a dosage of 4 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days each  month. 

Smyth and colleagues treated 134 breast cancer patients with mitoxantrone at 17 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks as primary  therapy. 

Their response rate was 35%, including six patients showing a complete response. 

Their regimen was similar to ours,  but they used a slightly higher starting dose. 

The Eastern Cooperative group used a dosage of 4 mg/m 2/d for 3 days every 3  weeks on patients for whom one prior chemotherapy regimen had failed, they have observed only two partial responses in 34  patients (6%). 

Mitoxantrone has shown reproducible but modest efficacy as a single agent in the doses and schedules used in  these studies. 

Its efficacy is probably comparable to that of most other agents currently used for treatment of breast  cancer. 

Our study suggests a lack of cross-resistance between doxorubicin and mitoxantrone. 

Seven of 46 patients (15%)  responded to one agent after having failed to respond to the other. 

The nonhematologic side effects of mitoxantrone are less than those of doxorubicin. 

Nausea, vomiting, and fatigue are seen  less frequently and are less severe. 

Alopecia to a degree that is bothersome for the patient is unusual, although some hair  loss is seen in one third of the patients treated with mitoxantrone. 

We made no formal evaluation of the quality of life in  this study, but the performance status tended to be worse in patients receiving prolonged doxorubicin treatment than in  patients receiving prolonged treatment with mitoxantrone. 

This effect was evident only among patients who responded and not  among those whose disease either progressed or showed no change. 

We have also presented evidence of the cardiotoxicity of  mitoxantrone, as have others. 

Although the crossover design of this study makes it impossible to attribute observed cardiac  toxicity to either agent, the incidence of CHF is more than might be expected with doxorubicin alone.

Although doxorubicin may be slightly more effective than mitoxantrone in producing tumor regression of breast cancer,  mitoxantrone is clearly less toxic and can produce important responses in patients refractory to CMF. 

Questions regarding  dosing, scheduling, and the optimum use of mitoxantrone have yet to be explored. 

Much higher doses may be given and may  improve antitumor effect. 

Only a few combinations have been tried, and experience with primary therapy is still limited.

