

MAJOR ADVANCES in breast cancer throughout the past decade have included the widespread introduction
of combination and  multimodality treatments and the development of new agents such as doxorubicin
and tamoxifen. Advanced breast cancer, however, is not curable, and survival is inadequate in terms
of both  quality and duration." 


Women with metastatic or unresectable regional breast cancer were eligible for this study if they
had received no more than  one prior chemotherapy regimen, they had not received anthracyclines, and
their previous therapy had failed. Patients with prolonged or  life-threatening marrow suppression
or severe nonhematologic toxicity (World Health Organization grade 3 or 48) had their  dose reduced
by 25% to 50%. Increasing shortness of breath in the presence of a changing and abnormal  gated
acquisition (MUGA) scan (< 0.50) or systolic time interval (STI) measurements (AD _ 28%) or a
physician's clinical  diagnosis of probable congestive heart failure (CHF) were designated as
drug-related CHF. 


Complete relief of pain in the absence of analgesics for at least 4 weeks was accepted as a partial
response if the  pain was clearly cancer related and had initially required analgesic therapy for
relief. Coombes et al have shown good  correlation between relief of bone pain in patients with
breast cancer and response in nonosseous sites using standard Union  Internationale Contre le Cancer
(UICC) criteria. Effusions, inflammatory skin  lesions, sclerotic bone lesions, and laboratory
abnormalities were not accepted as evaluable lesions. The statistical analysis of frequency data
relied on Yate's corrected  chi-square test or Fisher's exact test when the total number of
observations was <= 20.


It is too early to  evaluate one patient receiving initial mitoxantrone, and two patients chose not
to return after the first course although  neither had serious toxicity or subjective disease
progression. Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete
two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. 


Nausea and  vomiting (P < .001), alopecia (P < .001), and fatigue (P < .05) occurred less frequently
as a result of treatment with  mitoxantrone and tended to be less severe. 


This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side
effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with
CMF. The complete and partial response rates to these agents are similar, and observed  differences
are not statistically significant. Time to progression and the duration of remissions were almost
identical for  these agents in both primary and secondary treatment. 


We are aware of no other reported direct comparative study of these two agents, though two larger
studies are presently being  conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group and the Lederle Collaborative
Study Group. Their regimen was similar to ours,  but they used a slightly higher starting dose. The
Eastern Cooperative group used a dosage of 4 mg/m 2/d for 3 days every 3  weeks on patients for whom
one prior chemotherapy regimen had failed, they have observed only two partial responses in 34 
patients (6%). 


We made no formal evaluation of the quality of life in  this study, but the performance status
tended to be worse in patients receiving prolonged doxorubicin treatment than in  patients receiving
prolonged treatment with mitoxantrone. Although the crossover design of this study makes it
impossible to attribute observed cardiac  toxicity to either agent, the incidence of CHF is more
than might be expected with doxorubicin alone.
