
   MAJOR ADVANCES in breast cancer throughout the past decade have included the widespread introduction of combination and  multimodality treatments and the development of new agents such as doxorubicin and tamoxifen. Patients presenting with  symptomatic disease can now obtain substantial relief through firstline chemotherapy, and some patients probably live longer  as a result of treatment. Advanced breast cancer, however, is not curable, and survival is inadequate in terms of both  quality and duration." The therapies presently available for patients for whom first-line therapy has failed offer minimal,  if any, clinical benefits. There is clearly a need for new approaches and new agents for therapy for this disease. 
   Women with metastatic or unresectable regional breast cancer were eligible for this study if they had received no more than  one prior chemotherapy regimen, they had not received anthracyclines, and their previous therapy had failed. 
   Patients were considered evaluable for response if they completed two courses of therapy or showed documented disease  progression at any time. 
   Two patients were entered on the  mitoxantrone arm and one on doxorubicin without measurable disease and were therefore not eligible. It is too early to  evaluate one patient receiving initial mitoxantrone, and two patients chose not to return after the first course although  neither had serious toxicity or subjective disease progression. Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. Thirty-nine patients initially treated with doxorubicin and 40 initially treated  with mitoxantrone therefore received two full courses of therapy. Response rates are reported for all eligible patients and  for patients completing two full courses of therapy. Table 2 shows the patient response to both primary treatment and secondary treatment (after crossover).  The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicin and 17% with mitoxantrone. If only patients who received two full courses of therapy are considered, the response  rates to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin are 23% and 33%, respectively. Again the response rates (mitoxantrone, 21%, doxorubicin, 10%) were not  significantly different for the two agents. Overall response rates (primary and secondary treatment) are the same (22% v  25%). Responses were seen within two courses for  most patients, although two patients on each regimen received four or five courses before a response was noted. 
   In all cases,  failure was easily controlled or required no therapy. 
   This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. The complete and partial response rates to these agents are similar, and observed  differences are not statistically significant. Time to progression and the duration of remissions were almost identical for  these agents in both primary and secondary treatment. 
   We are aware of no other reported direct comparative study of these two agents, though two larger studies are presently being  conducted by the Southwest Oncology Group and the Lederle Collaborative Study Group. Yap and colleagues reported a 22% overall response rate in 31 patients with  highly refractive breast cancer who were treated with mitoxantrone at a dosage of 4 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days each  month. Their response rate was 35%, including six patients showing a complete response. 