MAJOR ADVANCES in breast cancerthroughout the past decade have includedthe widespread introduction of combination and multimodality treatments and the development of new agents such as doxorubicin and tamoxifen. Several bis-substituted anthraquinones were introduced into clinical trials about 5 years ago asan entirely new class of anticancer agents. Dihydroxyanthracenedione(mitoxantrone) has emerged as the most promising of this group of agents. This is the final report of that study.

All patients granted written consent after being informed of the experimental nature of the therapies. They were then randomized to receive either doxorubicin (60 mg/m2) or mitoxantrone (12 mg/m2) asinitial treatment. Doses were repeated every 3 weeks and increased by 25% until the patient achieved a WBC nadir of 5 2,500//L. Increasing shortness of breath in the presence of a changing and abnormalgated acquisition (MUGA) scan (< 0.50) or systolic timeinterval (STI) measurements (AD _ 28%) or a physician's clinical diagnosis of probable congestive heart failure (CHF) were designated as drug-related CHF. Either MUGA scans or STI measurements were scheduled before therapy, at least every three courses, and at crossover. Partial response required a 50% decrease in all lesions that persisted for at least one full course of therapy. Complete relief of pain in the absence of analgesics for at least 4 weeks was accepted as a partial response if the pain was clearly cancer related and had initially required analgesic therapy for relief. 

We have chosen to use pain as a response endpoint since palliation is an important goal in this setting and the randomized design helps alleviate bias that might result fromusing subjective end points. Response determinations were initially made by the patient's physician and a research nurse. They were then confirmed by at least one of the investigatorsin a blinded review of response data. 

RESULTS
Patient characteristics are presented in Table1. The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicinand 17% with mitoxantrone. One patient had a complete response to each agent. The 95% confidence intervals overlapped, and the differences were not statistically significant (P <.2). Seven of 46 patients who received either agent as secondary therapy (aftercrossover) had a response. Again the response rates (mitoxantrone, 21%, doxorubicin, 10%) were not significantly different for the two agents. Responses lasted for about 3 months in most patients but continued for more than a year in some. Nausea and vomiting (P < .001), alopecia (P < .001),and fatigue (P < .05) occurred less frequently as a result of treatment with mitoxantrone and tendedto be less severe. 

DISCUSSION
This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and doxorubicin inpatients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. The complete and partial response rates to these agents are similar, and observed differencesare not statistically significant. The Eastern Cooperative group used a dosage of 4mg/m 2/d for 3 days every 3 weeks on patients forwhom one prior chemotherapy regimen' 2 had failed, they have observed only two partial responsesin 34 patients (6%). Mitoxantrone has shown reproducible but modest efficacy as a single agent in the doses and schedules used in these studies. Seven of 46 patients (15%) responded to one agent after having failed to respond tothe other. Alopecia to a degree that is bothersome for the patient is unusual, althoughsome hair loss is seen in one third of the patients treated with mitoxantrone. 