Ninety patients with breast cancer refractory to cyclophosphamide/fluorouracil/methotrexate (CMF) have been randomized in  their treatment, receiving either doxorubicin or mitoxantrone. One  patient with clinical heart failure developing received only doxorubicin and one, only mitoxantrone, whereas the others  received both agents. Two of 22 (10%) patients receiving doxorubicin and five of 24 (21%)  receiving mitoxantrone as secondary therapy responded. In  1980, we initiated a prospective comparison of the most active standard agent for breast cancer, doxorubicin, and  mitoxantrone as therapy for minimally pretreated patients with breast cancer. PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients must have had measurable or evaluable disease. Patients were considered evaluable for response if they completed two courses of therapy or showed documented disease  progression at any time. Response determinations  were initially made by the patient's physician and a research nurse. Ninety patients entered the study. Four patients receiving mitoxantrone and one receiving  doxorubicin failed to complete two courses because of disease progression or toxicity. Thirty-nine patients initially treated with doxorubicin and 40 initially treated  with mitoxantrone therefore received two full courses of therapy. Response rates are reported for all eligible patients and  for patients completing two full courses of therapy. All patients were evaluable for nonhematologic toxicity. Three patients had refused standard regimens for breast cancer and  entered this study without prior therapy. Table 2 shows the patient response to both primary treatment and secondary treatment (after crossover).  The response rate to primary treatment for all eligible patients was 30% with doxorubicin and 17% with mitoxantrone. One  patient had a complete response to each agent. If only patients who received two full courses of therapy are considered, the response  rates to mitoxantrone and doxorubicin are 23% and 33%, respectively. Seven of 46 patients who received either agent as  secondary therapy (after crossover) had a response. Again the response rates (mitoxantrone, 21%; doxorubicin, 10%) were not  significantly different for the two agents. Responses were seen within two courses for  most patients, although two patients on each regimen received four or five courses before a response was noted. Pain relief  was the sole criterion of response for three patients receiving doxorubicin and one receiving mitoxantrone. More patients treated with mitoxantrone  (17%) required an escalation of the dose to achieve the desired level of myelosuppression than did patients treated with  doxorubicin (8%). This study was designed to determine comparative response rates, response durations, and side effects of mitoxantrone and  doxorubicin in patients with breast cancer who had failed therapy with CMF. Smyth and colleagues treated 134 breast cancer patients with mitoxantrone at 17 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks as primary  therapy. Their response rate was 35%, including six patients showing a complete response. 

