INTRODUCTION.
Radical external beam plus intracavitary radiation continues to be the standard therapy for advanced cervical cancer to which all new therapies must be compared. While this treatment is relatively effective in small volume tumors, tumor control and survival decline as the bulk of pelvic disease and FIGO stage advance. Overall 5-year survival rates are reported for stage IIB cancers between 50 and 80% and from 25 to 50% for stage III. No substantial improvements have been
made in the treatment of advanced cervical cancer in the past two decades. An analysis of the patterns of failure after radiation therapy in locally advanced cervical cancer reveals that of those who recur over 70% have some component of pelvic failure as the first site of relapse and two-thirds develop some component of distant disease. As the bulk of pelvic disease
increases, the proportion of patients with disease recurrent or persistent in the pelvis as the only site of failure increases compared to the proportion developing distant metastases. The problem of enhancing pelvic control and survival cannot be approached simply by increasing conventionally delivered radiation dose since late complications produced by radiation are at the upper limit of acceptability with currently employed doses.

Many investigations are ongoing to identify more effective treatment. These include modifications of radiation treatment volume or fractionation including extended field radiation, hyperfractionated RT, strategies to overcome the negative impact of tumor hypoxia such as hyperbaric oxygen, or hypoxic cell radiation sensitizers. In addition to modifications of radiation therapy multiple studies have investigated, and are investigating, strategies that combine radiation with chemotherapy either as neoadjuvant or concurrent administration. The results reported for trials of neoadjuvant cisplatin-containing chemotherapy prior to radiation have been disappointing with six randomized trials, showing no advantage in local control or survival and possibly some detrimental effect.

Concurrent chemotherapy with radiation offers a number of theoretical advantages over those of the neoadjuvant strategy. These advantages include no delay in the start of definitive irradiation, no prolongation of overall treatment time (thus minimizing the theoretical risk of accelerated clonogen proliferation during the antineoplastic course), and possible interaction of the concurrently administered chemotherapy with radiation through such mechanisms as inhibition of repair of radiation damage, cell synchronization, recruitment of nonproliferating cells into cell cycle, and reduction of the hypoxic fraction. Chemotherapy may also, as in the neoadjuvant strategy, have an independent, additive cytotoxic effect. Theoretical disadvantages of concurrent administration include increased acute toxicity which might limit or delay the delivery of definitive irradiation or increased late toxicity particularly if the drugs and radiation do not exhibit ‘‘toxicity’’ independence. Last, it is unlikely that concurrent chemotherapy usually given as only one or two doses would significantly reduce established distant micrometastases. To date, the only reported randomized studies of concurrent therapy are those of hydroxyurea and radiation versus radiation alone. While these studies suggested some benefit for patients with FIGO stage IIIB cancer, methodological problems in the study have not resulted in wide acceptance of the conclusion of benefit from concurrent hydroxyurea and its concurrent use has not entered standard practice.

Interest in infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with or without other agents such as mitomycin C and cisplatin, developed from both laboratory data suggesting enhanced tumor cell kill over radiation alone and clinical data. The success of concurrent regimens with these agents in patients with squamous cell carcinomas of other sites such as the anal canal and esophagus suggested that similar regimens were worthy of exploration in carcinomas of the cervix. In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FU to radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect. Nakajima et al. also had shown that enhancement could be improved by increasing the concentration of 5-FU. The optimal dosing schedule for maximizing cell kill with infusional 5-FU and radiation remains undefined, but laboratory data suggested greater effects with increasing dose and prolonged exposure to 5-FU and when drug was present for intervals in excess of 48 h after radiation. An earlier extensive phase I/II study of radical irradiation and infusional 5-FU based on the in vitro information established a safe regimen with acceptable toxicity for comparison in this randomized study.
