 A hope frequently pursued in clinical research has been that the activity of 5-FU can be enhanced either by adding the activity of other cytotoxic drugs or, more recently, by favorably modulating the effects of 5-FU itself. Although enhanced activity by such methods has occasionally been suggested in pilot studies or in phase 2 trials, these claims have seldom been substantiated by the essential definitive study-a randomized comparison with 5-FU used alone. These effects presumably occur through the action of thymidine in blocking oxidative metabolism of 5-FU and increasing 5-FU incorporation into RNA. Rustum demonstrated in colon 26 tumor and in a transplanted colon tumor in rats that thymidine plus 5-FU produced a significant prolongation of survival time when compared with 5-FU alone. In the study of Woodcock et al, the single colorectal cancer patient treated who was not a prior 5-FU failure had a response of 8 months duration. Overall therapeutic results were discouraging, specifically in colorectal cancer: a Mayo Clinic study demonstrated only one response among 30 patients, a study of the Baltimore Cancer Research Program showed no responses among 21 patients, and a New York Memorial study demonstrated only two minor responses among 19 evaluated patients. The second study, conducted at the University of Wisconsin (Madison), showed that advanced-disease patients treated with combined 5-FU and levamisole lived significantly longer than patients treated with 5-FU alone.  With this background we initiated a randomized controlled comparison of 5-FU alone with 5-FU plus high-dose thymidine, 5-FU plus PALA, 5-FU plus levamisole, and MOF-Strept. We elected to use survival as our primary endpoint in patients with both measurable and nonmeasurable disease and also to evaluate objective response rates among those patients with measurable disease. Patients were then randomized to treatment with 5-FU alone, 5-FU plus PALA. For the 5-FU plus thymidine regimen, patients were evaluated every 4 weeks, while for all other regimens, this evaluation occurred every 5 weeks. The log rank statistic was used to assess consistency of the data with equality of survival curves, while the Cox partial likelihood score statistic was used to assess consistency of the data with the hypothesis that any one of the combinations would yield at least a 50% improvement in survival over 5-FU alone. Four patients were lost to analysis due to ineligibility or cancellation on the 5-FU alone arm, four patients on 5-FU plus PALA, two patients on 5-FU plus thymidine, two patients on MOF-Strept, and none on 5-FU plus levamisole. 5-FU plus PALA had substantially more frequent mucocutaneous reactions and somewhat more frequent diarrhea, but less hematologic toxicity than 5-FU alone or any of the other regimens. On the other hand, 5-FU plus thymidine had a reduced incidence of mucocutaneous reactions and of diarrhea with comparable hematologic toxicity when compared with 5-FU alone. These reactions were primarily headache (seven patients), lethargy (four patients), dizziness with ataxia (four patients), and occasional confusion (two patients). There were three treatment-related deaths: one each on 5-FU alone, 5-FU plus thymidine, and MOF-Strept. It is noteworthy that while the MOF-Strept regimen had the highest regression rate, it was also the regimen with the lowest proportion of patients whose disease remained stable and the highest proportion of patients in whom the best response observed was tumor regression. There was no suggestion that any of the combination regimens performed in a superior fashion to 5-FU used alone, and it is unlikely that any could produce as much as a 50% increase in time to progression (P < .05) for each regimen v 5-FU alone. This was confirmed by a stratified Cox analysis, adjusting for key prognostic covariates, which indicated that the data were inconsistent with any combination regimen yielding a 50% increase in survival relative to 5-FU (ie, a hazard ratio of 1 .5), wherefore 5-FU plus PALA, P < .01; 5-FU plus thymidine, P < .0001: 5-FU plus levamisole, P < .01; In spite of the fact that the patients tested were in very good overall general condition with no previous chemotherapy exposure, none of our experimental regimens produced any meaningful advantage over therapy with simple 5-FU alone and none can be recommended for standard practice. The total dose of 5-FU in this combination was only 12% of the dosage of 5-FU used alone that would produce a comparable degree of hematologic toxicity.
