ADVANCED colorectal carcinoma is one of the most common oncologic challenges encountered in the Western world. Nevertheless there is little evidence of effective therapy for such patients other than symptomatic and supportive care. 5-Fluorouracil 5-FU is considered by many as the standard of chemotherapy but in larger experiences with this agent response rates have only been in the 15 to 20 range. These responses are usually partial sometimes questionable and generally very transient. To date there has been no convincing evidence that any chemotherapy of colorectal cancer contributes to either the duration or the quality of life. Although a large number of alternative drugs have been studied in colorectal cancer none has exceeded the meager effectiveness of 5-FU. A hope frequently pursued in clinical research has been that the activity of 5-FU can be enhanced either by adding the activity of other cytotoxic drugs or more recently by favorably modulating the effects of 5-FU itself. Although enhanced activity by such methods has occasionally been suggested in pilot studies or in phase 2 trials these claims have seldom been substantiated by the essential definitive study-a randomized comparison with 5-FU used alone. The purpose of the study reported here is to evaluate by such a randomized and controlled comparison a number of recent approaches that have either been shown in animal models to enhance 5-FU activity or have been claimed to produce favorable results on the basis of early human trials. We chose for our evaluation the combinations of 5- FU with thymidine with N-phosphonacetyl-Laspartic acid PALA with levamisole and with methyl CCNU vincristine and streptozotocin MOF-Strept. Thymidine given at high doses in animal model systems has been shown to increase both therapeutic activity and toxicity of 5-FU and to improve the therapeutic index of this agent. These effects presumably occur through the action of thymidine in blocking oxidative metabolism of 5-FU and increasing 5-FU incorporation into RNA. Rustum demonstrated in colon 26 tumor and in a transplanted colon tumor in rats that thymidine plus 5-FU produced a significant prolongation of survival time when compared with 5-FU alone. Studies by Woodcock et al by Kirkwood and Frei and by Vogel et a1 demonstrated that in humans pretreatment with thymidine increased the biologic activity of 5-FU up to eight-fold as measured by hematologic toxicity. In the study of Woodcock et al the single colorectal cancer patient treated who was not a prior 5-FU failure had a response of 8 months duration. They also observed one additional response among patients who had failed 5-FU. Overall therapeutic results were discouraging specifically in colorectal cancer: a Mayo Clinic study demonstrated only one response among 30 patients a study of the Baltimore Cancer Research Program showed no responses among 21 patients and a New York Memorial study demonstrated only two minor responses among 19 evaluated patients. Continued interest in PALA however was stimulated by animal model evidence that this agent inhibits pyrimidine synthesis and thereby enhances 5-FU activity by increasing its conversion to fluorouridine monophosphate FUMP. The second study conducted at the University of Wisconsin Madison showed that advanced-disease patients treated with combined 5-FU and levamisole lived significantly longer than patients treated with 5-FU alone. In a randomized trial this group showed that this combination produced superior response rates and survival when compared with their own variant of the 5-FU methyl CCNU vincristine combination. With this background we initiated a randomized controlled comparison of 5-FU alone with 5-FU plus high-dose thymidine 5-FU plus PALA 5-FU plus levamisole and MOF-Strept. Treatment Methodology. 5-FU alone. 5-FU was administered in undiluted form by rapid intravenous IV injection at a dose of 500 mg/m2 daily for 5 consecutive days. The single doses of thymidine and 5-FU were repeated at 4-week intervals. 5-FUplus PALA. 5-FU was administered by rapid IV injection at a dosage of 300 mg/m2 for 5 consecutive days. Courses of therapy were repeated every 5 weeks. 5-FU plus levamisole. 5-FU was administered in undiluted form by rapid IV injection at a dose of 500 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days. For the 5-FU plus thymidine regimen patients were evaluated every 4 weeks while for all other regimens this evaluation occurred every 5 weeks. Each combination regimen was compared to treatment with 5- FU alone with respect to duration of survival following randomization time to disease progression. objective regression rates among measurable patients and toxic reactions. Four patients were lost to analysis due to ineligibility or cancellation on the 5-FU alone arm four patients on 5-FU plus PALA two patients on 5-FU plus thymidine two patients on MOF-Strept and none on 5-FU plus levamisole. On the other hand 5-FU plus thymidine had a reduced incidence of mucocutaneous reactions and of diarrhea with comparable hematologic toxicity when compared with 5-FU alone. There were three treatment-related deaths: one each on 5-FU alone 5-FU plus thymidine and MOF-Strept. There was no suggestion that any of the combination regimens performed in a superior fashion to 5-FU used alone and it is unlikely that any could produce as much as a 50 increase in time to progression P .05 for each regimen v 5-FU alone. With the 5-FU-thymidine combination we observed a marked modulation of 5-FU effect with regard to both dose and toxicity. The total dose of 5-FU in this combination was only 12 of the dosage of 5-FU used alone that would produce a comparable degree of hematologic toxicity. 
