Nevertheless, there is little evidence of effective therapy for such patients other than symptomatic and supportive care. In the study of Woodcock et al, the single colorectal cancer patient treated who was not a prior 5-FU failure had a response of 8 months duration. They also observed one additional response among patients who had failed 5-FU. In the study of Vogel et al, two of five previously untreated colorectal cancer patients responded for 4 + and 7 months. Overall therapeutic results were discouraging, specifically in colorectal cancer: a Mayo Clinic study demonstrated only one response among 30 patients, a study of the Baltimore Cancer Research Program showed no responses among 21 patients, and a New York Memorial study demonstrated only two minor responses among 19 evaluated patients. The second study, conducted at the University of Wisconsin (Madison), showed that advanced-disease patients treated with combined 5-FU and levamisole lived significantly longer than patients treated with 5-FU alone. If this result could be confirmed it would be the first time that any regimen has demonstrated such significant survival improvement for advanced colorectal cancer in randomized trials. 

In 1981, a New York Memorial study reported a 32% objective response rate among 77 patients treated with MOF-Strept. In contrast, however, the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group reported only a 4% response rate among 41 patients treated with MOF-Strept and they discouraged further use of this combination. We elected to use survival as our primary endpoint in patients with both measurable and nonmeasurable disease and also to evaluate objective response rates among those patients with measurable disease. 


Patient Selection. Patients could be entered with either measurable or nonmeasurable disease. Patients were then randomized to treatment with 5-FU alone, 5-FU plus PALA. For the 5-FU plus thymidine regimen, patients were evaluated every 4 weeks, while for all other regimens, this evaluation occurred every 5 weeks. Treatment was continued until disease progression was documented. 


The primary endpoint of our overall study was patient survival. 


A secondary objective was to assess objective response rates among those patients who had measurable disease. 


Each combination regimen was compared to treatment with 5- FU alone with respect to duration of survival following randomization, time to disease progression. objective regression rates among measurable patients, and toxic reactions. 


A total of 347 patients were randomized on this study. The entries of two patients were cancelled after randomization, and ten patients were found to be ineligible. Four patients were lost to analysis due to ineligibility or cancellation on the 5-FU alone arm, four patients on 5-FU plus PALA, two patients on 5-FU plus thymidine, two patients on MOF-Strept, and none on 5-FU plus levamisole. These represent 97% of all patients randomized. At the time of this writing the study is very mature with 318 patients (95%) having shown progressive disease and 278 patients (83%) having been followed to the time of death. The pretreatment characteristics of our patients are displayed according to the treatment arm in Table 1. It is noteworthy that most of these patients were in excellent general condition. There are imbalances between treatment arms in sex ratio, grade of anaplasia, and patients admitted to study with progressive pulmonary lesions but no histologic proof of metastasis. One patient died in irreversible coma. There were also nine patients who experienced transient hypotension following drug administration. Eight patients on this combination complained of altered taste, primarily a metallic taste in the mouth. 


Objective response rates are shown according to regimen in Table 3. It is noteworthy that while the MOF-Strept regimen had the highest regression rate, it was also the regimen with the lowest proportion of patients whose disease remained stable and the highest proportion of patients in whom the best response observed was tumor regression. Sex ratios and patients with metastatic disease confirmed only by chest x-ray were also imbalanced in our study, but neither were important prognostic variables. 


Figure 2 displays the patient survival according to treatment regimen. The median survival for all patients was 81/4 months. 



