

This report summarizes the preliminary results of the trial which closed to patient accrual in June
1994. 


MATERIALS AND METHODS.Patients with clinical Stage IB–IIA cancer of the uterine cervix treated by
radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph node sampling were eligible
for entry into this prospective study if they had one or more of the following risk factors, (1)
metastatic disease to pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than or equal to 4 cm in
diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 75% or greater stromal invasion, (4) nonsquamous
histology, and/or (5) occult parametrial involvement or positive surgical margins. In the second arm
of the study, patients were randomized to treatment with a similar regimen of chemotherapy as
described above without pelvic radiation, following the first two cycles of cisplatin and bleomycin,
the patient then received the third and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week
intervals. 


Additional entry criteria included histologic confirmation of negative para-aortic lymph nodes,
normal renal function (creatinine clearance of greater than 60 ml/min), normal liver function tests,
hemoglobin of greater than 8.0 g/dl, and a normal DLCO pulmonary function test. 


Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors, 33
of these patients and the remaining 14 patients had a Stage IIA cancer. 


There were 12 major protocol viola-patients received only a portion of the proscribed treatment,
tions, including 7 patients who were randomized (6 to che-one patient, randomized to chemotherapy,
withdrew after chemotherapy plus radiation therapy and 1 patient to chemother-experiencing an
allergic bleomycin reaction during the initial chemotherapy alone) and then either refused treatment
(n ?6) or were infusion of bleomycin during cycle 1. Four patients randomized to chemotherapy plus
radiation refused either the radia-to follow-up or had no follow-up data available for analysis. 
tion therapy (n ?3) or had a major violation in the radiation Thus, there were 33 patients who
received the combination therapy treatment plan when intravaginal radiation therapy of chemotherapy
and pelvic radiation and 39 who received was administered, and she did not receive the last 2 cycles
chemotherapy alone who could be evaluated for disease-of cisplatin (n ?1). free and overall
survival. 


Among patients with 3 or more risk factors, there was also no differ-The debate regarding the role
of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free survival or overall survival when tients at high
risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy compared to patients with 1–2 risk factors (Fig. 3). 


Most the incidence of local and regional recurrences but does acute toxicity was generally of a
minor level related to antici-not affect the overall survival. Major toxicity suggest that a 65%
5-year survival rate after therapy combinincluded one patient who did not receive the second cycle
ing radical hysterectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and of bleomycin due to the onset of pulmonary
symptoms and postoperative pelvic radiotherapy for patients with pelvic a significant decrease in
pulmonary function compared to a lymph node metastases is an improvement compared to
his-pretreatment study. 


Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for recurrence after radical
hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a
minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all patients.
