The preferred treatment of women with early-stage cervical cancer (FIGO IA2--IIA) is radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy.

The overall prognosis for patients undergoing radical hysterectomy is good, with reported 5-year survival rates ranging from 75 to 90%.

However, among patients with a clinically early cancer, there are prognostic features which identify patients at increased risk for recurrence; recurrent cervical cancer after initial radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy has a poor prognosis, with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5% or less.

A retrospective study of patients undergoing radical hysterectomy at Memorial Sloan--Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) from 1939 to 1977 identified the following risk factors: metastatic tumor to the pelvic lymph nodes, large cervical tumor, parametrial extension of disease, nonsquamous or grade 3 histology, and deep (.75%) cervical stromal invasion.

These factors have been shown to be associated with a high risk of recurrence in other studies, both from single institutions and from cooperative groups.

There have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients at risk for recurrence who received adjuvant therapy compared to those patients not receiving adjuvant therapy.

Whole pelvic postoperative radiation therapy has been found to possibly decrease the incidence of local/regional recurrence with little or no effect on overall survival.

Chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation has been studied in our institution in a prospective Phase II trial, with an apparent improvement in survival rates when compared to historical controls.

Few reports have utilized adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy alone after radical surgery for invasive cervical cancer.

In an effort to determine whether the improved survival in the Memorial Hospital Phase II trial was due to the combination of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy or due to the effect of the chemotherapy alone, a multicenter randomized Phase III clinical trial was designed.

Patients who met the entry criteria were given the opportunity to participate in this clinical trial; entry and initiation of therapy had to be within 6 weeks of the date of radical hysterectomy.

One arm consisted of 2 cycles of chemotherapy (given 3--4 weeks apart) utilizing bleomycin 20 U/m2/day via continuous 24-hr infusion on Days 1--3 after an initial intravenous bolus of 20 U/m2 followed by cisplatin 75 mg/m2 by iv infusion on Day 4.

In the second arm of the study, patients were randomized to treatment with a similar regimen of chemotherapy as described above without pelvic radiation; following the first two cycles of cisplatin and bleomycin, the patient then received the third and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week intervals.

Randomization was performed at Memorial Sloan--Kettering Cancer Center by the Department of Biostatistics using an envelope system.

The null hypothesis considered that the two treatment arms, chemotherapy alone and chemotherapy plus radiation, would both result in 5-year disease-free survival of 70%.

Most the incidence of local and regional recurrences but does acute toxicity was generally of a minor level related to antici-not affect the overall survival.
