Adjuvant CMF in Breast Cancer: Comparative 5-Year Results of 12 Versus 6 Cycles

We report the 5-yr results of a prospective randomized
study comparing 12 versus 6 cycles of CMF (cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, fluorouracil) with the aim to
evaluate the possibility of reducing the duration of
adjuvant treatment without compromising the therapeutic
effect of the multimodal approach. At 5-yr
from mastectomy, both relapse-free survival (CMF 12:
59%; CMF 6: 65.6%) and total survival (CMF 12:
72.7%; CMF 6: 76.9%) were not significantly different
in the two treatment groups. Within the two series,
no difference was detected between pre- and
postmenopausal patients (CMF 12: 59.3% versus
57.6%; CMF 6: 66.5% versus 63.1%), while findings
were inversely related to the number of involved axillary
nodes. The analysis of relapse-free survival confirmed that in both menopausal groups, relapse-free
survival was not significantly affected by estrogen
receptor status. Acute toxic manifestations were moderate
and reversible. In particular, no drug-induced
leukemia nor increased incidence of solid tumors other
than breast cancer were documented in this series.
Present results after 12 CMF cycles are almost identical
to those of our first CMF adjuvant study. Current
findings are sufficiently mature to indicate that the
maximum tumor cytoreduction with CMF occurs within
a relatively short period of time. To improve the
results achieved with a single multidrug regimen,
more intensive forms of treatment, i.e., utilizing noncross-
resistant combinations, warrant careful
evaluation.

SINCE JUNE 1973, the therapeutic and toxicologic
effects of CMF (cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and fluorouracil) chemotherapy
were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori
of Milan as adjuvant treatment in patients with
operable breast cancer and histologically positive
axillary nodes. The aim of the first program was
to evaluate whether CMF given after radical surgery
was able to alter the course of the disease.
After radical mastectomy, eligible patients were
prospectively randomized to receive either no
further treatment or 12 monthly cycles of adjuvant
CMF. All our progress reports have consistently
demonstrated that there was a significant
difference in the relapse-free survival (RFS)
favoring patients who received adjuvant CMF.
The 7-yr results of this first program are now
available,6 and they confirm the benefit of CMFtreated
patients (RFS 49.2%) as compared to
women subjected to radical mastectomy alone
(RFS 35.8%, p < 0.002). These results, as well
as those reported in similar studies,' suggest that
the multimodality approach with cyclical combination chemotherapy is indeed an important advance
in the strategy of primary management of
resectable breast cancer, and therefore it is worthy
of more widespread consideration.
Among the numerous questions to be answered
by current adjuvant studies is the optimal
duration of treatment. In fact, a relative shortterm
adjuvant systemic treatment would spare
the patients a considerable amount of toxicity.
For this reason, in September 1975, we started a
new prospective study with the intent to evaluate
the possibility of reducing the duration of adjuvant
CMF without compromising the therapeutic
effect of combined treatment. The preliminary
3-yr results have shown that in premenopausal
women, 6 cycles of CMF yielded results that
were identical to those obtained with 12 cycles.
Similar findings were reported in the 4-yr analysis
for the total patient population. This article
presents the 5-yr results achieved in our study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Study Design and Treatment Schedule
Between September 1975 and May 1978, a total of 466 consecutive
patients were entered into a prospective randomized
study. Within 4 wk from surgery, patients with TI-3a breast
cancer, histologically positive axillary nodes, age < 70 yr, and
living fairly close to the Institute were allocated to receive either
12 or 6 cycles of CMF. Before being allocated to either treatment
group, patients were stratified according to the number of
axillary nodes involved (1-3 or more than 3). The technique of
block randomization (permuted block of length 4 for 2 regimens)
was utilized. Based on the 3-yr analysis of our first CMF study showing an apparent lack of therapeutic advantage following
adjuvant chemotherapy in postmenopausal women, randomization
for this group of patients was discontinued at the end of
November 1976. Therefore, all postmenopausal patients were
allocated to receive 12 CMF cycles between December 1976 and
March 1977 when accrual for postmenopausal patients was definitely
discontinued.
All patients were subjected to either Halsted or modified
radical mastectomy, but a small fraction (16%) was subjected to
extended radical mastectomy. No postoperative radiotherapy or
any other ancillary treatment was given. Adjuvant chemotherapy
was started within 2-4 wk from mastectomy. The dose schedule
of CMF was as follows: cyclophosphamide (CTX) 100
mg/sq m by mouth from day 1 to day 14, methotrexate (MTX)
40 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8, and fluorouracil (FU)
600 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8. No drug was
administered from day 15 to day 28, and CMF was recycled on
day 29. A total of 18 patients older than 65 yr (CMF 12: 12,
CMF 6: 6) were started on low-dose CMF (MTX 30 mg/sq m,
FU 400 mg/sq m). During treatment, a dose reduction schedule
was applied to all patients showing myelosuppression on days 1
and 8 of each treatment cycle. The dose of all three drugs was
reduced by 50% when the leukocyte count ranged from 3900 to
2500/cu mm or the platelet count from 99,000 to 75,000/cu mm.
In the presence of more severe myelosuppression, treatment was
delayed until at least half of the dose could be administered.
Toxic manifestations other than myelosuppression (e.g., mucositis
or cystitis) required temporary dose reduction only if
severe.
Primary treatment failure was accurately assessed by clinical,
radiologic, and whenever feasible, histologic examination of the
site(s) of first relapse. All radiographs were repeatedly reviewed
by a team of radiologists to confirm the presence and exact
timing of recurrence. At first relapse, treatment was uniform for
both groups of women. The following systemic treatment was
mainly utilized: patients in whom estrogen receptors were positive
were subjected to hormonal manipulations (ovariectomy in
premenopausal women and additive hormonal therapy, particularly
tamoxifen, in postmenopausal patients), combined sometimes
with chemotherapy. When estrogen receptors were negative
or could not be determined, systemic treatment consisted of
combination chemotherapy utilizing preferentially an adriamycin-
containing regimen. Whenever possible, patients who refused
second-line cytotoxic chemotherapy were treated utilizing
hormonal manipulations according to their age.
Patient Population
Of 466 patients entered into the study, 7 premenopausal women
were considered nonevaluable because of protocol violations.
In fact, the retrospective evaluation of roentgenograms revealed
the presence of distant metastases prior to radical mastectomy in
3 patients (CMF 12: 1; CMF 6: 2), while 4 additional women
(CMF 12: 3; CMF 6: 1) had fixation of the primary tumor to the
underlying pectoral fascia or muscle (T3b). Therefore, a total of
459 patients were found evaluable for treatment comparison,
i.e., 243 women (premenopausal 160, postmenopausal 83) allocated
in the 12-cycle group and 216 (premenopausal 164, postmenopausal
52) in the 6-cycle group, respectively.
A total of 22 patients (premenopausal 12/324 or 4%; postmenopausal
9/135 or 7%) refused to complete the planned adjuvant program mainly because of negative psychologic reasons. This
was especially observed in women planned to receive 12 CMF
cycles (18 of 243 or 7%) compared to those entered into the 6-
cycle regimen (4 of 216 or 2%). Furthermore, in 5 additional
patients, CMF was temporarily discontinued at some time during
treatment (for 2-3 mo) because women complained of constant
nausea due to oral cyclophosphamide. All these patients
were considered evaluable.
The majority of our patients (62%) had less than 3 nodes
involved, and in half of the women tumors ranged between 2 and
5 cm on pathologic measurement. Estrogen receptor (ER) status
could be determined at the time of mastectomy in 255 women
(55.6%) by using the dextran-coated charcoal assay, according
to the technique currently used in our laboratory. 10,11 ER tumors
were considered positive in 177 patients (69.4%), negative in 47
(18.4%), while the remaining tumors (12.2%) were considered
to have borderline values.
The median follow-up at the time of present analysis was 56
mo for the entire series of 459 evaluable patients.
Study Parameters
Details on baseline studies and follow-up program were as
previously reported,1, 2 and they can be summarized as follows.
Prior to mastectomy, all patients underwent complete physical
examination, x-ray of chest and skeleton (skull, spine, pelvis,
upper third of femurs), liver scan, bilateral mammography, hemogram,
and biochemical tests. In the absence of symptoms,
physical examination was performed once a month during the
first year following mastectomy, then every 3 mo during the
second and third years, and every 4-6 mo thereafter. Biochemical
tests (serum bilirubin, total proteins, alkaline phosphatase,
SGOT and SGPT, and LDH) were repeated every 6 mo during
the first 3 yr and once a year thereafter. Chest roentgenogram
was performed every 4 mo for the first year and semiannually
thereafter, while bone x-rays were carried out twice a year.
Liver scan and mammography of residual breast were done once
a year. In the presence of controversial radiologic findings,
examinations were performed more often than originally
planned. The short-term interval between two examinations was
planned to carefully assess the exact time and extent of new
disease manifestations. It is noteworthy that the vast majority of
our patients did comply with such strict criteria.
In the present series, baseline and routine bone scans were
systematically performed in about half of patients. They were
also performed whenever there were suspicious radiographic
findings or persisting bone pain in the presence of negative
roentgenograms.
Primary treatment failure was defined as the first documented
evidence of new disease manifestation(s) in either local-regional
area(s), distant site(s), or a combination of the two.
Statistical Evaluation
RFS was considered as the time elapsed from the date of
radical mastectomy to the first evidence of treatment failure. The
proportion of patients relapse-free or surviving are given for one
point in time (5 yr) as derived from plots. Probabilities represent
comparison of the entire plots, computed by use of the productlimit
method, and were calculated using the log-rank test and
values of significance. 
RESULTS
Results as Function of Treatment Programs
Figure 1 shows that the comparative RFS at 5
yr was practically identical in the two treatment
groups (CMF 12: 59%; CMF 6: 65.6%, p =
0.17). Table 1 details the results according to
menopausal and nodal status. It appears evident
that treatment regimens were unable to significantly
affect the RFS within each patient subset.
In postmenopausal women with more than 3 nodes, the difference between CMF 12 (34.4%)
and CMF 6 (54.9%, p = 0.18) is only apparent
since the confidence-limits throughout the curve
totally blurred the percent difference (standard
error, or SE, at 5 yr: 8.4 and 11.3, respectively).
It is important to emphasize that overall no
RFS difference was documented between preand
postmenopausal patients (CMF 12: 59.3%
versus 57.6%; CMF 6: 66.5% versus 63.1%,
respectively). The somewhat contrasting results
observed in the 6-cycle group in pre- and postmenopausal
patients with 1-3 nodes (80.3% versus
66.1%) again reflect only a fictitious difference
(SE: 4.1 and 8.1, respectively). The same is
true for pre- and postmenopausal women with
more than 3 nodes (45.7% L 6.8% versus
54.9% ± 11.3%). On the contrary, in both treatment
and menopausal groups, RFS was affected
by the number of involved nodes (Table 1).
Figure 2 shows the 5-yr total survival. Again,
no difference was observed in the two treatment
groups. The same held true when findings were
related to menopausal status. In fact, premenopausal
patients in the 12-cycle group had a 72%
5-yr survival compared to 77.1% for women in the 6-cycle group (p = 0.20). The findings for
postmenopausal women were 74.2% and 76.6%,
respectively (p = 0.72).
Site of First Relapse
No difference in the pattern of treatment failure
was evident between the treatment groups
(Table 2). It is important to note that the frequency
of local-regional recurrences, either alone or
associated to distant metastases, was in the range
of 8%-10%. The incidence of contralateral
breast involvement alone, which in our series has
always been considered as primary treatment
failure, was 2.5% versus 2.3%. No substantial
difference was also documented in the pattern of
new disease manifestations, either local-regional
or distant, between pre- and postmenopausal
women.
Results as Function of ER status
Regardless of the type of treatment, RFS and
overall survival were correlated with the presence
(ER +) or absence (ER -) of estrogen receptors
in the primary tumor. Table 3 details the
findings observed at 5 yr from mastectomy. As
can be seen, RFS was superior in patients with
ER + tumors, but this difference failed to reach
statistical significance in all patient subsets.
Also, no difference was evident when overall
survival of postmenopausal women was examined
(ER+ 82.5% versus ER- 76.2%, p =
0.32). By contrast, premenopausal women with
ER + tumors had a significantly longer survival
than their matches with ER- tumors (79.9%
versus 67.6%, p = 0.03). At present, this difference
is somewhat difficult to explain. In fact,
there was no striking difference in the pattern of new disease manifestations between ER + and
ER - tumors, since visceral involvement was
documented in 31.2% and 35.3%, respectively,
of relapsed patients. However, in spite of the fact
that frequency of objective remission was superimposable
(-30%) in both ER groups regardless
of treatment administered and site(s) of first involvement,
the disease in ER + tumors had a
more indolent course, while ER - tumors
showed further progression within a few months.
Results as Function of Dose Levels of CMF
The importance of the level of doses administered
has been detailed in one of our previous
reports. 4 A similar type of analysis was performed
on patients entered into this study. Table
4 shows that also in this series there was evidence
of a dose-response effect, regardless of menopausal
and nodal status (CMF 12: level I 68.9%
versus level 11147.2%, p < 0.05; CMF 6: level I
66.6% versus level III 51.5%, p = 0.10). Furthermore,
within each dose level, there was no
statistically significant difference between patients
in the 12- or 6-cycle group.
Early and Late Toxicity
Acute toxic reactions have been previously reported.
8 Nausea, vomiting, and hair loss were the most distressing side effects. Myelosuppression
represented the dose-limiting factor in the large
majority of patients (70%-80%), but severe leukopenia
and/or thrombocytopenia were rare
(10%), and prolonged myelosuppression beyond
the fourth week from drug discontinuation was
never observed. No hematologic or infectious
complications from repeated episodes of myelosuppression
were documented, and no evidence
of liver damage attributable to prolonged administration
of methotrexate was detected.13
Only a small subgroup of 22 patients (4.8%)
refused to complete the planned program, and
this was essentially due to negative psychologic
reasons since these patients objected to being on
a heavy and toxic treatment program (drug injections
and timing of follow-up) without having
visible disease.
Frequency of second tumors was similar in
both treatment groups. As already reported (Table
2), contralateral breast cancer was documented
in a total of 11 patients (CMF 12: 6; CMF 6:
5). Four additional patients showed second tumors
other than breast cancer. In one patient of
the 6-cycle group, endometrial carcinoma in situ
was documented within 16 mo from mastectomy;
3 patients in the 12-cycle group developed
endometrial carcinoma, thyroid cancer, and
myoblastoma, respectively, and in all patients
second neoplasms were diagnosed between 46
and 49 mo from mastectomy. So far no patient
has developed acute leukemia. Table 5 presents
the comparative frequency of second tumors between
our first two CMF programs. As can be
seen, the relative frequency ranged between
0.5% for the 6-cycle group and 1.7% for the
control group of the previous series.
DISCUSSION
The 5-yr results of the present study are now
sufficiently mature to indicate with confidence
that 6 cycles of CMF are equivalent to 12 cycles
in terms of RFS and total survival. In fact, in all
variables examined, none of the two treatments
under evaluation was significantly different from
the other. The observation that in some patient
subsets 6 cycles of CMF yielded apparently superior
results to 12 cycles is probably related to
the relative number of patients in each group and
to the different median follow-up in postmenopausal
women whose accrual was discontinued in December 1976. In fact, confidence limits of
the various series totally blurred the difference
throughout the curves. A long-term analysis
would probably clarify this aspect.
Besides RFS and survival, other findings
would support evidence that 6 cycles of CMF are
as effective as 12 cycles. One of them is the dose
level of CMF, the importance of which has been
extensively evaluated in a recent publication. 4
Our data suggest that the main important pharmacologic
factor affecting tumor response is the
peak level of drugs administered and not their
total amount.4 '14 Present clinical findings (Table
4) would indeed substantiate the above-mentioned
statement, since no difference was detected
when the three different dose levels were analyzed
within the two treatment groups. Another
important finding to be considered is the pattern
of new disease manifestations where no difference
in the frequency of local-regional and/or
distant areas was evident between the two treatment
groups. Thus, all above reported findings
strongly support our preliminary 3-yr results8 and
indicate that utilizing a single multidrug regimen,
it is possible to reduce the duration of adjuvant
treatment in operable breast cancer without
compromising the therapeutic results.
Present results are in line with those reported
in a similar study carried out at the Sidney Farber
Cancer Institute. I" In this trial, patients with > 4 positive axillary nodes or with a positive node in
the highest axillary zone were randomized to receive
cyclophosphamide and adriamycin for 5
courses (15 wk) or the same regimen given for 10
courses (30 wk). Henderson et al.15 reported that
at 6 yr of follow-up (median 2.6 yr), no RFS or
survival difference was evident between the two
groups.
Our findings can be further utilized to make
interstudy comparisons between present results
and those of our previous trial.' In fact, patient
selection, staging procedures, type of surgery,
methods of drug administration, and follow-up
examinations were similar in both trials. Furthermore,
all women were accurately treated and
followed in a single center by the same staff of
surgeons, medical oncologists, and research
nurses. The 5-yr results achieved in the first
study are reported in Table 6 and compared with
those obtained in the present series. It appears
evident that: (A) the two series given 12 cycles of
CMF achieved the same results; (B) the data reported
in the three series treated with CMF are
almost equivalent; (C) adjuvant CMF, whether
administered for 12 or 6 cycles, was able to alter
the course of operable breast cancer with positive
axillary lymph nodes compared to the group subjected
to radical mastectomy alone.
Other considerations of practical importance
can also be derived from our current findings.
The first and most important one is that there
appears to be no real difference following adjuvant
chemotherapy, namely CMF, between the
RFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women
(CMF 12: 59.3% versus 57.6%; CMF 6: 66.5%
versus 63.1%, respectively). We had previously
reported4 that the different results observed in our
first adjuvant program were probably due to the
low-dose CMF started in 31 of 104 postmenopausal
patients (30%) because of elderly age.
Low-dose CMF was applied only in 12 of 83 (14%) of the present 12-cycle group and in 6 of
52 (12%) of the 6-cycle group. Thus, in the present
study, only a small fraction of patients was
started on drug doses that once more proved to be
therapeutically ineffective. The findings supporting
evidence of a therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant
combination chemotherapy in postmenopausal
patients can also be found in the results
reported by other investigators who have never
observed that menopausal status affected treatment
outcome. More recently, the Guy's Hospital
and Manchester study groups reported the
actuarial 5-yr RFS of a randomized study comparing
radical mastectomy alone versus melphalan
versus CMF and showed that the only group
significantly improved by adjuvant CMF was
that of postmenopausal women, while premenopausal
patients had findings that were superimposable
in all three treatment groups. A trend
favoring postmenopausal versus premenopausal
women given adjuvant combination chemotherapy
was also observed by the NSABP group.
Effective adjuvant combination chemotherapy
seems to be unaffected by ER status, at least
when RFS is considered. Our results have been
confirmed through different reports. In spite
of initial controversial findings, recent retrospective
studies carried out in advanced breast
cancer have consistently shown lack of significant
correlation between ER status and response
rate to cytotoxic chemotherapy. The results obtained
in our series between ER + and ER -
tumors, coupled with the overall findings observed
in the two menopausal groups, further
contribute to minimize the possible therapeutic
role of chemotherapy-induced adjuvant castration
in premenopausal women. The fact that
premenopausal women with ER + showed a significantly
longer survival than their matches with
ER - tumors remains to be further evaluated. At
present, we have no clear explanation for this
difference. Patterns of first treatment failure
were not different in the two series and, regardless
of treatment instituted upon relapse, frequency
of objective remissions were similar between
the two groups followed by short-lived
remissions in ER - tumors, while ER + tumors
tended to show slow growing disease. Based on
our current findings, i.e., therapeutic efficacy of
adjuvant CMF regardless of ER status, there
seems to be no clinical reason to withhold the administration of adjuvant combination chemotherapy
in node positive women even in the presence
of ER + tumors. Whether combined
chemotherapy-hormonal therapy in this group of
patients could yield superior results compared to
chemotherapy alone, remains to be determined
not only through appropriate randomized studies,
25 but also through long-term analyses.
The most important practical aspect of our current
study is at which point a single drug combination
has provided all the benefit possible, i.e.,
maximal tumor cytoreduction, in the majority of
patients. Through the analysis of our results in
advanced breast cancer treated with CMF, Skipper
came to the conclusion that in clinically metastatic
disease the nadir in surviving tumor cells
is probably reached in the majority of patients in
less than 6 cycles. 26 Our clinical findings from an
adjuvant treatment support this conclusion and
indicate that the maximum therapeutic effect can
be obtained with 6 or probably less than 6 cycles
of CMF. Therefore, there are no sound clinical
reasons to prolong treatment utilizing the same
drugs beyond a 6-mo period. This observation is
indirectly supported by findings obtained at the
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center"7
where 24 cycles of CMF were unable to obtain
results superior to those achieved in our series.
Also, the Arizona group'8 utilizing a different
combination regimen, i.e., adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide,
for about 6 mo achieved a 5-yr
RFS that is very similar to that observed in our
studies. Thus, from available reports it appears
that different adjuvant treatments consisting of a
single multidrug regimen can achieve comparable
RFS results regardless of treatment duration.
This is an extremely important clinical observation.
In fact, although both frequency and intensity
of acute toxicity from adjuvant therapy such
as CMF are moderate, patients can be spared
unnecessary side effects, including negative psychologic
reactions, if treatment duration is rendered
more tolerable. Moreover, a less protracted
exposure to cytotoxic regimens, including
alkylating agents and adriamycin, could decrease
the potential risk of delayed morbidity, namely
cancerogenesis and chronic organ damage.
The reason(s) why RFS was not improved by
prolonging chemotherapy once pathologic complete
remission has been achieved, in our own
trial and in other adjuvant trials for breast cancer, as well as in a variety of neoplastic diseases, can
now be interpreted by considering the problem of
specifically multidrug-resistant phenotypes.
Briefly, all classes of drugs select and allow
overgrowth of specifically drug-resistant neoplastic
cells. Repetitive dose treatments either
eradicate all or the vast majority of drug-sensitive
neoplastic cells or hold them in check, leaving
fluctuating and sometimes larger numbers of
drug-resistant cells. Eventually, and regardless
of prolonged chemotherapy, the resistant neoplastic
cells overgrow, become clinically evident,
and kill the host. The 40-yr-old mutation
theory of Luria and Delbruck developed for bacterial
cells was recently adapted to cancer, i.e.,
neoplastic cells mutate spontaneously to a state
of specific resistance to a wide variety of anticancer
drugs. This appears to be a basic law that
underlies and explains some (not all) important
and consistent observations in the area of cancer
chemotherapy. 28 In our optimal kinetic situation,
cyclic or sequential delivery of equally effective
and non-cross-resistant drugs often will prevent
or delay failures due to overgrowth of drug-resistant
sublines of neoplastic cells, as recently
demonstrated in advanced Hodgkin's disease.
However, it should be kept in mind that, as emphasized
by Skipper, 28 doses and schedules employed
usually are of greater importance than the
variable of cyclic or sequential delivery of
combinations.
Since our current results with adjuvant CMF
are comparable to those utilizing a 5-drug combination'
6 or an adriamycin-containing regimen, clinical research efforts should now aim at improving
the intrinsic limitation of a single multidrug
regimen. Our current protocols are testing
sequential versus alternating delivery of CMF
and adriamycin, since our previous experience33
has demonstrated that both treatments are equally
effective and non-cross-resistant. Furthermore,
to insure full drug doses in the new protocols,
we have modified the CMF regimen and all
three drugs are administered intravenously every
3 wk (CTX and FU 600 mg/sq m, MTX 40 mg/
sq m). In the presence of myelosuppression
(leukocytes < 3800/cu mm and/or platelets
< 100,000/cu mm) on day 22, treatment is delayed
1-2 wk to allow a constant delivery of full
doses.
In conclusion, the 5-yr results of our randomized study confirm that CMF, particularly when
delivered at nearly full doses, can indeed alter the
postoperative course of breast cancer with positive
axillary nodes. The presence of specifically
multidrug-resistant phenotypes limits the therapeutic
effectiveness of a single combination and
renders its prolonged administration unnecessary.
Only long-term analysis will answer the
questions of whether the addition of adjuvant
hormone therapy to chemotherapy will improve
the results in ER + tumors"2 and whether the
excellent results reported by the M. D. Anderson
Hospital with FAC (fluorouracil, adriamycin,
cyclophosphamide) in women with > 4 axillary
nodes 7 will be reproducible. At present, tumor
cell burden in the axilla appears to consistently
represent an important prognostic factor, even in
the presence of full dose chemotherapy, while
new prospective trials should explore the potential
efficacy of multiple non-cross-resistant drug
combinations delivered for a relatively short
time.