Radical external beam plus intracavitary radiation continues to be the standard therapy for advanced cervical cancer to which all new therapies must be compared. While this treatment is relatively effective in small volume tumors tumor control and survival decline as the bulk of pelvic disease and FIGO stage advance. Overall 5-year survival rates are reported for stage IIB cancers between 50 and 80 and from 25 to 50 for stage III. An analysis of the patterns of failure after radiation therapy in locally advanced cervical cancer reveals that of those who recur over 70 have some component of pelvic failure as the first site of relapse and two-thirds develop some component of distant disease. As the bulk of pelvic disease increases the proportion of patients with disease recurrent or persistent in the pelvis as the only site of failure increases compared to the proportion developing distant metastases. The problem of enhancing pelvic control and survival cannot be approached simply by increasing conventionally delivered radiation dose since late complications produced by radiation are at the upper limit of acceptability with currently employed doses. These include modifications of radiation treatment volume or fractionation including extended field radiation hyperfractionated RT strategies to overcome the negative impact of tumor hypoxia such as hyperbaric oxygen or hypoxic cell radiation sensitizers. In addition to modifications of radiation therapy multiple studies have investigated and are investigating strategies that combine radiation with chemotherapy either as neoadjuvant or concurrent administration. The results reported for trials of neoadjuvant cisplatin-containing chemotherapy prior to radiation have been disappointing with six randomized trials showing no advantage in local control or survival and possibly some detrimental effect. To date the only reported randomized studies of concurrent therapy are those of hydroxyurea and radiation versus radiation alone. Interest in infusional 5-fluorouracil 5-FU with or without other agents such as mitomycin C and cisplatin developed from both laboratory data suggesting enhanced tumor cell kill over radiation alone and clinical data. In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FU to radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect. The optimal dosing schedule for maximizing cell kill with infusional 5-FU and radiation remains undefined but laboratory data suggested greater effects with increasing dose and prolonged exposure to 5-FU and when drug was present for intervals in excess of 48 h after radiation. Two factors were altered in arm d compared to standard arm a: 1 the addition of 5-FU 2 the change in radiation fractionation scheme. Assuming that the magnitude and direction of the 5-FU effects were similar in arms b and d then the effect of the addition of 5-FU could be tested by comparing arms b and d with arms a and c. Additionally the changed fractionation scheme with delivery of two fractions daily at the beginning and end of therapy was designed to maximize the potential for interaction between 5-FU and radiation and to potentially reduce complication rates. In the standard radiation plus 5-FU arm b 52 of the 53 patients received the standard dose prescription. Of the 23 patients who received no intracavitary radiation or doses less than 500 cGy there was a relatively even distribution across the treatment arms with 5 in arm a 5 in arm b 3 in arm c and 9 in arm d. Of the patients randomized to receive standard radiation with 5-FU four received no chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course. The KaplanMeier plots of overall disease-free survival disease-free survival for each stratum and disease free survival by treatment assigned are shown in Figs. 2 3 and4 respectively. Whereas there was once again a trend in favor of concurrent 5-FU particularly in combination with standard radiation the difference was not statistically significant. There was a significant improvement in 5-year survival and disease-free survival for those treated with standard radiation and 5-FU compared to the other treatments log rank test P 5 0.05. The actuarial 5-year disease-free survival was 76 compared to 65 for hyperfractionated irradiation plus 5-FU 58 for hyperfractionated irradiation alone and 39 for standard radiation. Similar differences were observed in pelvic control but the addition of 5-FU to standard radiation resulted in a greater improvement in disease-free survival than in pelvic control. A factorial analysis of the magnitude of the impact of differences in the radiation schedule or the addition of 5-FU on the improvements in pelvic control and disease-free survival in stratum 1 was performed. In examining the effect of the addition of 5-FU on disease-free survival in stratum 1 there is a highly significant difference in favor of the use of 5-FU regardless of the radiation employed. The 5-year KaplanMeier disease-free survival for those irradiated without 5-FU was 48 versus 71 for those who received 5-FU log rank P 5 0.02 Fig. 6. However in evaluating the importance of the contribution of the change in fractionation to the differences observed there was no significant difference in the 5-year survival of those treated on standard radiation versus those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation whether or not 5-FU was used. It was hoped that the use of two treatments daily during the 5-FU infusion would increase any opportunity for 5-FU-radiation interaction by increasing the total amount of radiation given concurrently with 5-FU. The observed differences in pelvic control and survival in favor of the standard radiation and concurrent 5-FU associated with the addition of 5-FU rather than the change in radiation schedule. Since significant differences in pelvic control and survival were observed in stratum 1 which contained only 99 patients it is important to examine whether there was an uneven distribution of other possible patient or tumor-related prognostic factors across the treatment arms to account for the differences observed. We wished to determine whether there was an accumulation of bad risk factors in the group receiving standard radiation alone or alternatively that there was an accumulation of good risk factors in patients receiving standard RT and 5-FU. If anything there was a slight excess of larger tumors in those receiving standard radiation and 5-FU the arm with the best outcomes. The radiation scheme used in this study conforms to those guidelines although the inability to apply intracavitary radiation in 10 of these patients with advanced disease was disappointing. However in stratum 1 constituted of patients with stage IB/IIA and those IIB tumors with medial parametrial involvement a significant improvement in both pelvic control and disease-free survival in favor of standard radiation with concurrent 5-FU was observed Figs. 5 and 6. A factorial analysis compared the outcome for all patients treated with concurrent 5-FU compared to those without 5-FU. The direction of benefit in favor of 5-FU with standard radiation compared to the other treatments was the same in strata 1 and 2. The observed complication rate in any of the treatment arms appears acceptable 7 with standard radiation whether or not 5-FU was added and 4 in the hyperfractionated radiation arms whether or not 5-FU was added. The second rationale for use of the partially hyperfractionated radiation scheme was to attempt to maximize the dose of radiation delivered during the infusion of 5-FU. Hyperfractionated radiation and 5-FU should theoretically have offered a benefit over that of standard radiation and 5-FU if increased tumor cell kill results from any interaction between the modalities. From the subset analysis of this trial we have generated the hypothesis that there may be a beneficial effect of adding concurrent infusional 5-FU to standard in patients with the disease characteristics of stratum 1. 
