

While this treatment is relatively effective in small volume tumors, tumor control and survival
decline as the bulk of pelvic disease and FIGO stage advance. 


Many investigations are ongoing to identify more effective treatment. 


Theoretical disadvantages of concurrent administration include increased acute toxicity which might
limit or delay the delivery of definitive irradiation or increased late toxicity particularly if the
drugs and radiation do not exhibit ‘‘toxicity’’ independence. While these studies suggested some
benefit for patients with FIGO stage IIIB cancer, methodological problems in the study have not
resulted in wide acceptance of the conclusion of benefit from concurrent hydroxyurea and its
concurrent use has not entered standard practice.


The optimal dosing schedule for maximizing cell kill with infusional 5-FU and radiation remains
undefined, but laboratory data suggested greater effects with increasing dose and prolonged exposure
to 5-FU and when drug was present for intervals in excess of 48 h after radiation. An earlier
extensive phase I/II study of radical irradiation and infusional 5-FU based on the in vitro
information established a safe regimen with acceptable toxicity for comparison in this randomized
study.


Eligible patients were to have biopsy proven invasive carcinoma of the cervix of any pathological
type excluding small cell carcinoma and to have primary radiotherapy with curative intent selected
as their definitive treatment. 


Exclusion criteria included preexisting malignancy except basal or squamous cell carcinoma of the
skin. Patients were randomized to receive either (a) standard external beam pelvic irradiation
(EBRT) in a dose of 5000 cGy in 25 fractions defined at 100% versus, (b) RT as in arm (a) with
infusional intravenous 5-FU in a dose of 1 g/m2 daily on the first and last 4 days of RT, (c)
partially hyperfractionated RT, 5280 cGy in 33 fractions, 2 fractions per day on the first and last
4 days of RT, or (d) arm (c) with the same infusional 5-FU. 


Patients were treated prone preferably using a four-field box technique, or a parallel pair. For
rare patients with disease extension to the lower one-third of vagina, the first application to the
cervix and uterus was modified to deliver 30 Gy at 2 cm from the center of the sources and a second
application as a line source in the vagina, was used to deliver a further 20 Gy at 0.5 cm depth from
the surface of the vagina. 5-FU was given as an infusion from days 1 to 4 inclusive and on treatment
days 22 to 25 inclusive. Where possible, chemotherapy infusion was given on four consecutive days
without a weekend break. Appropriate guidelines for 5-FU dosage reduction or elimination were
recommended for hematologic or mucosal toxicity, but RT interruptions were not. 


Statistical Methods and Study Design.Additionally, the changed fractionation scheme with delivery of
two fractions daily at the beginning and end of therapy was designed to maximize the potential for
interaction between 5-FU and radiation and to potentially reduce complication rates. In order to
detect an improvement of 15% in survival in arms (c) and (d) compared to that seen in arms (a) and
(b), assuming a 40% cause-specific survival rate in arm (a) and an alpha of 0.05 and beta of 0.2,
the total number of patients required was 272.


The Kaplan–Meier method was used to calculate median follow-up duration, censoring patients who
died. 


Severe late or chronic bowel symptoms were those of fistula, perforation, stricture, or obstruction
requiring hospitalization or surgery and bleeding requiring transfusion. 


The median size of tumor was 6.5 cm (range 3.5 to 18 cm). 


In the ‘‘partially hyperfractionated irradiation arm’’ (c), two patients had radiation dose
violations, one a dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions and the other a dose of 59 Gy in 33 fractions. 


In patients randomized to receive hyperfractionated irradiation and 5-FU, three received no
chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course.


A factorial analysis of the magnitude of the impact of differences in the radiation schedule or the
addition of 5-FU on the improvements in pelvic control and disease-free survival in stratum 1 was
performed. When the radiation fraction size is reduced as in this altered fractionation scheme a
compensatory increase in total dose over the same overall time is required to reach a biologically
similar dose. 


There were too few patients in stratum 3 to do valid statistical analyses. Since significant
differences in pelvic control and survival were observed in stratum 1 which contained only 99
patients, it is important to examine whether there was an uneven distribution of other possible
patient or tumor-related prognostic factors across the treatment arms to account for the differences
observed. 


However, given the observation of a consistent trend in favor of standard RT plus 5-FU it was felt
justified to perform an exploratory subset analysis of each stratum. A number of patient- and
tumor-related factors were analyzed for their impact on outcome using the Cox’s proportional hazard
model. The tumor- and patient-related factors examined were FIGO stage (IB versus IIA versus IIB),
size of tumor (greater or less than 6 cm and greater or less than 7 cm), grade of tumor the presence
or absence of capillary-like space involvement, nodal involvement, and patient age as a continuous
variable. 


The overall incidence of serious complications was too low to detect differences between the
treatment arms. 


Hyperfractionated radiation and 5-FU should theoretically have offered a benefit over that of
standard radiation and 5-FU if increased tumor cell kill results from any interaction between the
modalities. Theoretical explanations for the lack of benefit may include a reduction in tumor cell
kill due to the reduced radiation fraction size and/or an insufficient compensatory increase in
total dose to compensate for the reduced fraction size. 


An alternative explanation is that 5-FU contributed to pelvic control and better pelvic control
decreased the frequency of distant metastases.
