 The problem of enhancing pelvic control and survival cannot be approached simply by increasing conventionally delivered radiation dose since late complications produced by radiation are at the upper limit of acceptability with currently employed doses. These include modifications of radiation treatment volume or fractionation including extended field radiation, hyperfractionated RT, strategies to overcome the negative impact of tumor hypoxia such as hyperbaric oxygen, or hypoxic cell radiation sensitizers. These advantages include no delay in the start of definitive irradiation, no prolongation of overall treatment time (thus minimizing the theoretical risk of accelerated clonogen proliferation during the antineoplastic course), and possible interaction of the concurrently administered chemotherapy with radiation through such mechanisms as inhibition of repair of radiation damage, cell synchronization, recruitment of nonproliferating cells into cell cycle, and reduction of the hypoxic fraction. In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FU to radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect. The optimal dosing schedule for maximizing cell kill with infusional 5-FU and radiation remains undefined, but laboratory data suggested greater effects with increasing dose and prolonged exposure to 5-FU and when drug was present for intervals in excess of 48 h after radiation. Patients were randomized to receive either (a) standard external beam pelvic irradiation (EBRT) in a dose of 5000 cGy in 25 fractions defined at 100% versus, (b) RT as in arm (a) with infusional intravenous 5-FU in a dose of 1 g/m2 daily on the first and last 4 days of RT, (c) partially hyperfractionated RT, 5280 cGy in 33 fractions, 2 fractions per day on the first and last 4 days of RT, or (d) arm (c) with the same infusional 5-FU. Two factors were altered in arm (d) compared to standard arm (a): (1) the addition of 5-FU, (2) the change in radiation fractionation scheme. In order to detect a 20% improvement in pelvic control rate from an expected 50% for arm (a) to 70% for arm (d) assuming an alpha of 0.05 and beta of 0.20, 73 patients in each of four treatment arms would be required for a total of 292 patients. In the standard radiation plus 5-FU arm (b), 52 of the 53 patients received the standard dose prescription. Of the 23 patients who received no intracavitary radiation or doses less than 500 cGy, there was a relatively even distribution across the treatment arms with 5 in arm (a), 5 in arm (b), 3 in arm (c), and 9 in arm (d). Of the patients randomized to receive standard radiation with 5-FU, four received no chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course. There was a significant improvement in 5-year survival and disease-free survival for those treated with standard radiation and 5-FU compared to the other treatments (log rank test P 5 0.05). Similar differences were observed in pelvic control, but the addition of 5-FU to standard radiation resulted in a greater improvement in disease-free survival than in pelvic control. A factorial analysis of the magnitude of the impact of differences in the radiation schedule or the addition of 5-FU on the improvements in pelvic control and disease-free survival in stratum 1 was performed. In examining the effect of the addition of 5-FU on disease-free survival in stratum 1, there is a highly significant difference in favor of the use of 5-FU regardless of the radiation employed. However, in evaluating the importance of the contribution of the change in fractionation to the differences observed, there was no significant difference in the 5-year survival of those treated on standard radiation versus those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation whether or not 5-FU was used. It was hoped that the use of two treatments daily during the 5-FU infusion would increase any opportunity for 5-FU-radiation interaction by increasing the total amount of radiation given concurrently with 5-FU. The observed differences in pelvic control and survival in favor of the standard radiation and concurrent 5-FU associated with the addition of 5-FU rather than the change in radiation schedule. Since significant differences in pelvic control and survival were observed in stratum 1 which contained only 99 patients, it is important to examine whether there was an uneven distribution of other possible patient or tumor-related prognostic factors across the treatment arms to account for the differences observed. We wished to determine whether there was an accumulation of ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿bad riskÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ factors in the group receiving standard radiation alone or alternatively that there was an accumulation of ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿good riskÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ factors in patients receiving standard RT and 5-FU. To reach the conclusion that concurrent chemotherapy truly adds benefit to results achievable with radiation alone, it is important that the radiation be delivered in an optimal manner with adequate doses at ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿Point Aÿ¿¿¿¿¿ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ (80 to 90 Gy) and limited overall treatment times. The radiation scheme used in this study conforms to those guidelines, although the inability to apply intracavitary radiation in 10% of these patients with advanced disease was disappointing. However, in stratum 1 constituted of patients with stage IB/IIA and those IIB tumors with medial parametrial involvement, a significant improvement in both pelvic control and disease-free survival in favor of standard radiation with concurrent 5-FU was observed (Figs. A factorial analysis compared the outcome for all patients treated with concurrent 5-FU compared to those without 5-FU. The treatment related factors examined were the use of intracavitary radiation, the use of 5-FU, and the fractionation scheme, standard versus partially hyperfractionated. The observed complication rate in any of the treatment arms appears acceptable, 7% with standard radiation whether or not 5-FU was added and 4% in the hyperfractionated radiation arms whether or not 5-FU was added.  The second rationale for use of the partially hyperfractionated radiation scheme was to attempt to maximize the dose of radiation delivered during the infusion of 5-FU. Hyperfractionated radiation and 5-FU should theoretically have offered a benefit over that of standard radiation and 5-FU if increased tumor cell kill results from any interaction between the modalities.
