SINCE JUNE 1973 the therapeutic and toxicologic effects of CMF cyclophosphamide methotrexate and fluorouracil chemotherapy were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan as adjuvant treatment in patients with operable breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes. The aim of the first program was to evaluate whether CMF given after radical surgery was able to alter the course of the disease. After radical mastectomy eligible patients were prospectively randomized to receive either no further treatment or 12 monthly cycles of adjuvant CMF.  All our progress reports have consistently demonstrated that there was a significant difference in the relapse-free survival RFS favoring patients who received adjuvant CMF. The 7-yr results of this first program are now available6 and they confirm the benefit of CMFtreated patients RFS 49.2 as compared to women subjected to radical mastectomy alone RFS 35.8 p 0.002. These results as well as those reported in similar studies suggest that the multimodality approach with cyclical combination chemotherapy is indeed an important advance in the strategy of primary management of resectable breast cancer and therefore it is worthy of more widespread consideration. For this reason in September 1975 we started a new prospective study with the intent to evaluate the possibility of reducing the duration of adjuvant CMF without compromising the therapeutic effect of combined treatment. The preliminary 3-yr results have shown that in premenopausal women 6 cycles of CMF yielded results that were identical to those obtained with 12 cycles. Within 4 wk from surgery patients with TI-3a breast cancer histologically positive axillary nodes age 70 yr and living fairly close to the Institute were allocated to receive either 12 or 6 cycles of CMF. Before being allocated to either treatment group patients were stratified according to the number of axillary nodes involved 1-3 or more than 3. Based on the 3-yr analysis of our first CMF study showing an apparent lack of therapeutic advantage following adjuvant chemotherapy in postmenopausal women randomization for this group of patients was discontinued at the end of November 1976. Therefore all postmenopausal patients were allocated to receive 12 CMF cycles between December 1976 and March 1977 when accrual for postmenopausal patients was definitely discontinued. A total of 18 patients older than 65 yr CMF 12: 12 CMF 6: 6 were started on low-dose CMF MTX 30 mg/sq m FU 400 mg/sq m. The following systemic treatment was mainly utilized: patients in whom estrogen receptors were positive were subjected to hormonal manipulations ovariectomy in premenopausal women and additive hormonal therapy particularly tamoxifen in postmenopausal patients combined sometimes with chemotherapy. Therefore a total of 459 patients were found evaluable for treatment comparison i.e. 243 women premenopausal 160 postmenopausal 83 allocated in the 12-cycle group and 216 premenopausal 164 postmenopausal 52 in the 6-cycle group respectively. Furthermore in 5 additional patients CMF was temporarily discontinued at some time during treatment for 2-3 mo because women complained of constant nausea due to oral cyclophosphamide. Figure 1 shows that the comparative RFS at 5 yr was practically identical in the two treatment groups CMF 12: 59 CMF 6: 65.6 p 0.17. In postmenopausal women with more than 3 nodes the difference between CMF 12 34.4 and CMF 6 54.9 p 0.18 is only apparent since the confidence-limits throughout the curve totally blurred the percent difference standard error or SE at 5 yr: 8.4 and 11.3 respectively. The somewhat contrasting results observed in the 6-cycle group in pre- and postmenopausal patients with 1-3 nodes 80.3 versus 66.1 again reflect only a fictitious difference SE: 4.1 and 8.1 respectively. In fact premenopausal patients in the 12-cycle group had a 72 5-yr survival compared to 77.1 for women in the 6-cycle group p 0.20. In fact there was no striking difference in the pattern of new disease manifestations between ER and ER - tumors since visceral involvement was documented in 31.2 and 35.3 respectively of relapsed patients. Table 4 shows that also in this series there was evidence of a dose-response effect regardless of menopausal and nodal status CMF 12: level I 68.9 versus level 11147.2 p 0.05 CMF 6: level I 66.6 versus level III 51.5 p 0.10. Only a small subgroup of 22 patients 4.8 refused to complete the planned program and this was essentially due to negative psychologic reasons since these patients objected to being on a heavy and toxic treatment program drug injections and timing of follow-up without having visible disease. In one patient of the 6-cycle group endometrial carcinoma in situ was documented within 16 mo from mastectomy 3 patients in the 12-cycle group developed endometrial carcinoma thyroid cancer and myoblastoma respectively and in all patients second neoplasms were diagnosed between 46 and 49 mo from mastectomy. The 5-yr results of the present study are now sufficiently mature to indicate with confidence that 6 cycles of CMF are equivalent to 12 cycles in terms of RFS and total survival. The observation that in some patient subsets 6 cycles of CMF yielded apparently superior results to 12 cycles is probably related to the relative number of patients in each group and to the different median follow-up in postmenopausal women whose accrual was discontinued in December 1976. Thus all above reported findings strongly support our preliminary 3-yr results and indicate that utilizing a single multidrug regimen it is possible to reduce the duration of adjuvant treatment in operable breast cancer without compromising the therapeutic results. Henderson et al.15 reported that at 6 yr of follow-up median 2.6 yr no RFS or survival difference was evident between the two groups. The first and most important one is that there appears to be no real difference following adjuvant chemotherapy namely CMF between the RFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women CMF 12: 59.3 versus 57.6 CMF 6: 66.5 versus 63.1 respectively. The findings supporting evidence of a therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in postmenopausal patients can also be found in the results reported by other investigators who have never observed that menopausal status affected treatment outcome. The results obtained in our series between ER and ER - tumors coupled with the overall findings observed in the two menopausal groups further contribute to minimize the possible therapeutic role of chemotherapy-induced adjuvant castration in premenopausal women. Patterns of first treatment failure were not different in the two series and regardless of treatment instituted upon relapse frequency of objective remissions were similar between the two groups followed by short-lived remissions in ER - tumors while ER tumors tended to show slow growing disease. Based on our current findings i.e. therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant CMF regardless of ER status there seems to be no clinical reason to withhold the administration of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in node positive women even in the presence of ER tumors. Through the analysis of our results in advanced breast cancer treated with CMF Skipper came to the conclusion that in clinically metastatic disease the nadir in surviving tumor cells is probably reached in the majority of patients in less than 6 cycles. 
