

SINCE JUNE 1973, the therapeutic and toxicologic effects of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and
fluorouracil) chemotherapy were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan as adjuvant
treatment in patients with operable breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes. 


All patients were subjected to either Halsted or modified radical mastectomy, but a small fraction
(16%) was subjected to extended radical mastectomy. Toxic manifestations other than myelosuppression
(e.g., mucositis or cystitis) required temporary dose reduction only if severe.


Primary treatment failure was accurately assessed by clinical, radiologic, and whenever feasible,
histologic examination of the site(s) of first relapse. When estrogen receptors were negative or
could not be determined, systemic treatment consisted of combination chemotherapy utilizing
preferentially an adriamycin- containing regimen. 


In fact, the retrospective evaluation of roentgenograms revealed the presence of distant metastases
prior to radical mastectomy in 3 patients (CMF 12, 1, CMF 6, 2), while 4 additional women (CMF 12,
3, CMF 6, 1) had fixation of the primary tumor to the underlying pectoral fascia or muscle (T3b). 


The median follow-up at the time of present analysis was 56 mo for the entire series of 459
evaluable patients.


On the contrary, in both treatmentand menopausal groups, RFS was affected by the number of involved
nodes (Table 1). 


Regardless of the type of treatment, RFS and overall survival were correlated with the presence (ER
+) or absence (ER -) of estrogen receptors in the primary tumor. However, in spite of the fact that
frequency of objective remission was superimposable (-30%) in both ER groups regardless of treatment
administered and site(s) of first involvement, the disease in ER + tumors had amore indolent course,
while ER - tumors showed further progression within a few months.


Only a small subgroup of 22 patients (4.8%) refused to complete the planned program, and this was
essentially due to negative psychologic reasons since these patients objected to being on a heavy
and toxic treatment program (drug injections and timing of follow-up) without having visible
disease.


In one patient of the 6-cycle group, endometrial carcinoma in situ was documented within 16 mo from
mastectomy, 3 patients in the 12-cycle group developed endometrial carcinoma, thyroid cancer, and
myoblastoma, respectively, and in all patients second neoplasms were diagnosed between 46 and 49 mo
from mastectomy. 


The observation that in some patient subsets 6 cycles of CMF yielded apparently superior results to
12 cycles is probably related to the relative number of patients in each group and to the different
median follow-up in postmenopausal women  whose accrual was discontinued in December 1976. Besides
RFS and survival, other findings would support evidence that 6 cycles of CMF are as effective as 12
cycles. 


In fact, patient selection, staging procedures, type of surgery, methods of drug administration, and
follow-up examinations were similar in both trials. It appears evident that, (A) the two series
given 12 cycles of CMF achieved the same results, (B) the data reported in the three series treated
with CMF are almost equivalent, (C) adjuvant CMF, whether administered for 12 or 6 cycles, was able
to alter the course of operable breast cancer with positive axillary lymph nodes compared to the
group subjected to radical mastectomy alone. 


The first and most important one is that there appears to be no real difference following adjuvant
chemotherapy, namely CMF, between the RFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women (CMF 12, 59.3% versus
57.6%, CMF 6, 66.5% versus 63.1%, respectively). The results obtained in our series between ER + and
ER - tumors, coupled with the overall findings observed in the two menopausal groups, further
contribute to minimize the possible therapeutic role of chemotherapy-induced adjuvant castration in
premenopausal women. Whether combined chemotherapy-hormonal therapy in this group of patients could
yield superior results compared to chemotherapy alone, remains to be determined not only through
appropriate randomized studies, but also through long-term analyses. In fact, although both
frequency and intensity of acute toxicity from adjuvant therapy such as CMF are moderate, patients
can be spared unnecessary side effects, including negative psychologic reactions, if treatment
duration is rendered more tolerable. Moreover, a less protracted exposure to cytotoxic regimens,
including alkylating agents and adriamycin, could decrease the potential risk of delayed morbidity,
namely cancerogenesis and chronic organ damage. Repetitive dose treatments either eradicate all or
the vast majority of drug-sensitive neoplastic cells or hold them in check, leaving fluctuating and
sometimes larger numbers of drug-resistant cells. In our optimal kinetic situation, cyclic or
sequential delivery of equally effective and non-cross-resistant drugs often will prevent or delay
failures due to overgrowth of drug-resistant sublines of neoplastic cells, as recently demonstrated
in advanced Hodgkin's disease. However, it should be kept in mind that, as emphasized by Skipper, 28
doses and schedules employed usually are of greater importance than the variable of cyclic or
sequential delivery of combinations.


Furthermore, to insure full drug doses in the new protocols, we have modified the CMF regimen and
all three drugs are administered intravenously every 3 wk (CTX and FU 600 mg/sq m, MTX 40 mg/sq m). 


The presence of specifically multidrug-resistant phenotypes limits the therapeutic effectiveness of
a single combination and renders its prolonged administration unnecessary. 
