
   SINCE JUNE 1973, the therapeutic and toxicologic effects of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil) chemotherapy were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan as adjuvant treatment in patients with operable breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes. After radical mastectomy, eligible patients were prospectively randomized to receive either no further treatment or 12 monthly cycles of adjuvant CMF. All our progress reports have consistently demonstrated that there was a significant difference in the relapse-free survival (RFS) favoring patients who received adjuvant CMF. These results, as well as those reported in similar studies, suggest that the multimodality approach with cyclical combination chemotherapy is indeed an important advance in the strategy of primary management of resectable breast cancer, and therefore it is worthy of more widespread consideration. 
   In fact, a relative shortterm adjuvant systemic treatment would spare the patients a considerable amount of toxicity. The preliminary 3-yr results have shown that in premenopausal women, 6 cycles of CMF yielded results that were identical to those obtained with 12 cycles. This article presents the 5-yr results achieved in our study. 
   Study Design and Treatment Schedule. Within 4 wk from surgery, patients with TI-3a breast cancer, histologically positive axillary nodes, age < 70 yr, and living fairly close to the Institute were allocated to receive either 12 or 6 cycles of CMF. 
   No postoperative radiotherapy or any other ancillary treatment was given. The dose of all three drugs was reduced by 50% when the leukocyte count ranged from 3900 to 2500/cu mm or the platelet count from 99,000 to 75,000/cu mm. In the presence of more severe myelosuppression, treatment was delayed until at least half of the dose could be administered. 
   At first relapse, treatment was uniform for both groups of women. The following systemic treatment was mainly utilized, patients in whom estrogen receptors were positive were subjected to hormonal manipulations (ovariectomy in premenopausal women and additive hormonal therapy, particularly tamoxifen, in postmenopausal patients), combined sometimes with chemotherapy. When estrogen receptors were negative or could not be determined, systemic treatment consisted of combination chemotherapy utilizing preferentially an adriamycin- containing regimen. 
   In the absence of symptoms, physical examination was performed once a month during the first year following mastectomy, then every 3 mo during the second and third years, and every 4-6 mo thereafter. Chest roentgenogram as performed every 4 mo for the first year and semiannually thereafter, while bone x-rays were carried out twice a year. 
   The proportion of patients relapse-free or surviving are given for one point in time (5 yr) as derived from plots. 
   RESULTS. Results as Function of Treatment Programs. The somewhat contrasting results observed in the 6-cycle group in pre- and postmenopausal patients with 1-3 nodes (80.3% versus 66.1%) again reflect only a fictitious difference (SE, 4.1 and 8.1, respectively). Figure 2 shows the 5-yr total survival. In fact, premenopausal patients in the 12-cycle group had a 72% 5-yr survival compared to 77.1% for women in the 6-cycle group (p = 0.20). 
   Also, no difference was evident when overall survival of postmenopausal women was examined (ER+ 82.5% versus ER- 76.2%, p =0.32). 
   Henderson et al.15 reported that at 6 yr of follow-up (median 2.6 yr), no RFS or survival difference was evident between the two groups. 
   The 5-yr results achieved in the first study are reported in Table 6 and compared with those obtained in the present series. 
   We had previously reported4 that the different results observed in our first adjuvant program were probably due to the low-dose CMF started in 31 of 104 postmenopausal patients (30%) because of elderly age. Also, the Arizona group utilizing a different combination regimen, i.e., adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide, for about 6 mo achieved a 5-yr RFS that is very similar to that observed in ourstudies. 