Radiotherapy combined with treatment with hydroxyurea has been compared in separate trials with radiotherapy alone, with radiotherapy and concomitant therapy with misonidazole, and with radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil (and Whitney CW: unpublished data). As compared with radiotherapy alone, treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy significantly increased the rate of complete response, progression-free survival, and overall survival. As compared with treatment with misonidazole and radiotherapy, treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy increased progression-free survival and was less toxic. However, treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and radiotherapy resulted in greater improvement in progression-free survival and overall survival than did treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy (Whitney CW: unpublished data). Thus, a total of 526 patients were included in the analysis: 176 in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy; 173 in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea; and 177 in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy. 

The relative risk of progression of disease or death was 0.57 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.42 to 0.78) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.55 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.40 to 0.75) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy, after adjustment for the clinical stage of disease. After adjustment for these five factors, the relative risks of disease progression for the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea were extremely close (relative risks, 0.58 and 0.55, respectively) to the estimates obtained after adjustment for clinical stage of disease alone. The rates of progression-free survival at 24 months were 67 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy; 64 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea; and 47 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy. A total of 205 patients have died (39 percent): 59 in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy; 57 in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea; and 89 in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy. After adjustment for the clinical stage of disease, the relative risk of death was 0.61 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.44 to 0.85) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.58 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.41 to 0.81) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy. Survival rates were also significantly better in these two groups (P=0.004 and P=0.002, respectively) than in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (Fig. 


Patients in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea had less local progression (19 percent and 20 percent, respectively) than those in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (30 percent). The number of patients who received within 15 percent of the prescribed total dose to both point A (69 to 93 Gy) and point B (stage IIB, 47 to 63 Gy; stage III or IVA, 51 to 59 Gy) was 159 (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy; 147 (85 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea; and 149 (84 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy. The frequencies of other hematologic effects of both grade 3 and grade 4 - predominantly granulocytopenia - in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea therapy were approximately double those in the other two groups (P<0.001). 


We found higher rates of survival and progression-free survival among patients who were treated with radiotherapy and either cisplatin alone or cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea than among patients who were treated with radiotherapy and hydroxyurea alone. found that radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin increased the rates of death of these tumor cells. used radiotherapy concurrently with treatment with cisplatin, followed by high-dose brachytherapy, to treat 50 patients with cervical cancer. 


Our results demonstrate the superiority of radiotherapy and chemotherapy either with cisplatin alone or with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IIB, III, or IVA without metastasis to the para-aortic lymph nodes). Treatment with cisplatin alone was less toxic than treatment with the three-drug regimen. We recommend cisplatin as the standard drug for radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer. 
