

Several  studies have been able to demonstrate a good correlation between the number of CD34+ cells
in the harvest and the number of  CFU–GM. 


The yield of CD34+ cells obtained by leukapheresis is significantly influenced by the extent and
duration of prior  chemotherapy, therapy with stem cell-toxic drugs such as carmustine or melphalan,
and extensive radiotherapy. 


Inclusion criteria for patients with BC were >10  positive lymph nodes, positivity in all examined
lymph nodes at first diagnosis, or local regional relapse within 2 years  after first diagnosis and
initially positive lymph nodes. Exclusion criteria Exclusion criteria were refractoriness to
platelet  transfusion, disorders of blood coagulation, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, disease
manifestation in the central nervous system, fever >38.5°C within 48 hours before leukapheresis,
dilatative cardiomyopathy, symptomatic ischemic heart  disease, heart attack within 6 months before
leukapheresis, chronic lung disease with hypoxemia, severe drug-resistant  hypertension, severe
nonadjustable diabetes, epileptic seizures, impairment of renal function with serum creatinine >2.0
mg  per dL, elevation of liver enzymes >3 times the normal value and/or a bilirubin value >2.0 mg
per dL, clinical symptoms of  impaired cerebral blood circulation, severe psychiatric disease, and
previous bone marrow or PBPC transplantation.


Seven patients of  the NHL group had stage IV follicular lymphoma and were included in an ongoing
randomized trial comparing the effect of HDCT  to that of conventional chemotherapy. Three patients
with diffuse large-cell lymphoma and persistent disease after standard chemotherapy  and two with a
chemotherapy-sensitive relapse were included. 


In 18 patients with BC, the mobilization regimen given  consisted of epirubicin at 50 mg per m2,
ifosfamide at 4000 mg per m2, cisplatinum at 50 mg per m², and etoposide at 500 mg  per m2 . The
other 8 patients with BC underwent mobilization with epirubicin at 90 mg per m² and cyclophosphamide
at 600 mg  per m2. 


Leukapheresis procedures were begun when the white  cell count exceeded 1 × 109 per L. In all LVL
procedures, 6  International Units (IU) of heparin (Hoffmann-La Roche, Grenzach-Wyhlen, Germany) per
1 mL of ACD-A was used as additional  anticoagulant.28 The leukapheresis values are described in
Table 2. 


One patient underwent transplantation twice, and  thus a total of 38 PBPC transplantations were
performed in 37 patients. 


Considering this value for the two patient groups separately, in  patients with BC, the median
number of CFU–GM per kg of BW after cryopreservation was significantly higher in the patients 
undergoing LVL than in those undergoing NVL (3.5 vs. 2.4 × 105, p = 0.0047), whereas in the patients
with NHL there was no  difference between LVL and NVL (2.7 and 2.1 × 105, p = 0.35).


Of the 6 patients being given grafts from an NVL, only 3  with BC had sufficient numbers of PBPCs in
one-half of the collection, the others, 2 with BC and 1 with NHL, received a total  harvest. 


When all procedures were  considered, the median number of CD34+ cells and the median extraction
efficacy were significantly higher in LVL than in NVL.  Our observation that the  extraction
efficacy of LVL differed in patients with BC and those with NHL may help to explain conflicting data
in the  literature. Upon return, these mobilized progenitor cells migrate into the bone marrow and
reconstitute hematopoiesis. At  least from a kinetic point of view, a transient, rapid increase,
such as that after physical exercise or the administration  of adrenocorticotropic hormone,
endotoxin, dextran sulfate, or antibodies against the cell adhesion molecule VLA-4, can be 
distinguished from a delayed, sustained increase that can be observed, for example, after the
administration of G–CSF. 


Preliminary data (Humpe A, manuscript in preparation) suggest that the decrease in CD34+ cell
numbers in peripheral blood during leukapheresis and the increase in the numbers in the collection
bag can be well described by a cell-kinetic model consisting of the three distributional
compartments, bone marrow, peripheral blood, and extracorporeal volume. In vitro experiments were
able to show that homing and transmigration of PBPCs are also dependent on PECAM-1 (CD31), a
heparin-binding adhesion molecule. 35,36 Thus, it may be that heparin interacts with the
microenvironment of PBPCs. 


With both leukapheresis procedures taken together, none of the patients with BC failed to achieve 2
× 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW, but, in the NHL group, 26.7 percent of the patients still did not
achieve a transplantation dose and a back-up dose. Recently published data18 showed that prior
exposure to chemotherapy, especially to DexaBEAM, or prior radiotherapy has a significant influence
on the yield of PBPCs. Apart from the harvest of a transplantation dose and an additional dose as
back-up, the aim of a leukapheresis could be to harvest maximum numbers of CD34+ cells. Recent
data15 suggest that hematopoietic toxicity, platelettransfusion support, and quality of life may be
positively influenced by the return of more than 15 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW after HDCT. 
