The yield of CD34+ cells obtained by leukapheresis is significantly influenced by the extent and duration of prior chemotherapy, therapy with stem cell-toxic drugs such as carmustine or melphalan, and extensive radiotherapy. In some uncontrolled studies, an influence of the leukapheres is size on the number of PBPCs in the harvest was observed. Large-volume leukapheresis (LVL) is defined either by processing a minimum of 15 L of peripheral blood or by processing more than three times the total peripheral blood volume. It has been suggested that it might be possible to harvest sufficient numbers of PBPCs for transplantation by one LVL only. In 50 percent of previously treated patients it has been possibleto harvest more than 1.0 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW in a single LVL procedure. However, these favorable results could not be confirmed in all investigations. 

After giving informed consent, patients in each patient group, that is, BC and NHL, were randomly allocated by sealed-envelope technique to undergo either LVL in which 4.5 ± 15 percent of the total peripheral blood volume wasprocessed and an NVL in which 2.5 ± 15 percent of the total peripheral blood volume was processed on the consecutive day, or vice versa (an NVL followed by an LVL). Inclusion criteria for patients with NHL were large-cell lymphomawith persistent disease after standard chemotherapy or at relapse or low-grade NHL stage III/IV andprogressive disease. All patients with chemotherapy-sensitive disease were eligible. 

Exclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria were refractoriness to platelet transfusion,disorders of blood coagulation, heparin-inducedthrombocytopenia, disease manifestation in the centralnervous system, fever >38.5°C within 48 hours beforeleukapheresis, dilatative cardiomyopathy, symptomatic is chemicheart disease, heart attack within 6 months beforeleukapheresis, chronic lung disease with hypoxemia, severe drug-resistant hypertension, severe nonadjustable diabetes,epileptic seizures, impairment of renal function withserum creatinine >2.0 mg per dL, elevation of liver enzymes>3 times the normal value and/or a bilirubin value >2.0 mgper dL, clinical symptoms of impaired cerebral blood circulation,severe psychiatric disease, and previous bone marrow or PBPC transplantation.

Patients and study population
During the study period, a total of 100 patients underwent PBPC mobilization and harvest. After mobilization and progenitorcell harvest, two patients with NHL and two with BC were not eligible for HDCT and PBPC transplantationbecause of progressive disease. In patients with partial remission or initial bone marrow involvement, PBPCs werecollected again after further cycles of chemotherapy. Bags of PBPCs harvested as late as possible during treatment but still containing a sufficient number of PBPCs were chosen for transplant. Calculations were performed with a software program (Statistical Analysis System, version 6.12,SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Results were considered to be significantly different when the p value was below 0.05.

RESULTS
Yield of CD34+ cells and extraction efficacy. The median number of CD34+ cells was significantly higher in LVL than in NVL (Table 3 and Fig. 2). In all but three of these patients, the NVL was scheduled on Day 2. As this value was greater than zero for both procedures, NVL as well as LVL seems to lead to a recruitment of PBPCs. But patients with BC hadsignificantly higher (p = 0.012 and p = 0.028, respectively) median numbers of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral blood before leukapheresis than patients with NHL had (LVL, 61vs. 24, NVL, 64 vs. 23). Moreover, in patients with BC, the median extraction efficacy was significantly higher(p<0.0001) for LVL than for NVL, whereas, in patients with NHL, there was no difference (p = 0.24) between the two procedures (see Table 3). In PBPC transplantation, patients received a median of 2.7 × 106CD34+ cells per kg of BW (range, 1.0-7.8 × 106) and a medianof 2.0 × 105 CFU–GM per kg of BW after cryopreservation(range, 0.7-10.4 × 105). A platelet count >20,000per µL without transfusion support was reached after amedian of 12 days (8-70) after transplant. Twenty-five transplantations were performed in 24 patientswith grafts from study leukapheresis procedures alone. In 23 transplantations, the graft of one leukapheresis component was sufficient in PBPC content. Seventeen patients, 14 with BC and 3 with NHL, received a graft from anLVL. Only 1 of these patients with BC needed a total harvest,the other 16 received only one-half of the leukapheresis component.  In both LVL and NVL, the median extraction efficacy was greater than zero, which suggests thatadditional PBPCs must have been recruited into the peripheralblood during leukapheresis, as also reported by others. The number of “recruited” CD34+ cells per kg of BWis in the magnitude of 1 (NVL) to 3.5 (LVL) times that in a transplantation dose. Our observation that the extraction efficacy of LVL differed in patients with BC and those withNHL may help to explain conflicting data in the literature. In children, the processing of more blood volumes does notnecessarily lead to increased recruitment of PBPCs. The phenomenon of hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization is poorly understood. Stem and progenitor cells are released from the bone marrow into the peripheral blood, where they can beharvested by leukapheresis. At least from a kinetic point of view, a transient, rapid increase, such as that after physical exercise or the administration of adrenocorticotropic hormone,endotoxin, dextran sulfate, or antibodies againstthe cell adhesion molecule VLA-4, can be distinguished from a delayed, sustained increase that can be observed, forexample, after the administration of G–CSF. 
Preliminary data (Humpe A, manuscript in preparation) suggest that the decrease in CD34+ cell numbers in peripheral blood duringleukapheresis and the increase in the numbers in the collection bag can be well described by a cell-kinetic modelconsisting of the three distributional compartments, bonemarrow, peripheral blood, and extracorporeal volume. 
