Peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPC) transplantation has become a widely accepted therapeutic option for patients with chemotherapy-sensitive malignancies. 

We therefore performed a prospective, randomized, sequential crossover trial in patients with breast cancer (BC) or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) to evaluate the effect of LVL compared with normal-volume leukapheresis (NVL) on the absolute number of harvested CD34+ cells and on the extraction efficacy, defined as the difference between the yield in the harvest and the decrease in the total number of CD34+ cells in peripheral blood during leukapheresis. Extraction efficacy was defined as the number of CD34+ cells per leukapheresis – (the number of CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood before leukapheresis – the number of CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood after leukapheresis). Furthermore, the number of CFU–GM was measured after cryopreservation for all leukapheresis samples. All patients with chemotherapy-sensitive disease were eligible. Exclusion criteria Exclusion criteria were refractoriness to platelet transfusion, disorders of blood coagulation, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, disease manifestation in the central nervous system, fever >38.5°C within 48 hours before leukapheresis, dilatative cardiomyopathy, symptomatic ischemic heart disease, heart attack within 6 months before leukapheresis, chronic lung disease with hypoxemia, severe drug-resistant hypertension, severe nonadjustable diabetes, epileptic seizures, impairment of renal function with serum creatinine >2.0 mg per dL, elevation of liver enzymes >3 times the normal value and/or a bilirubin value >2.0 mg per dL, clinical symptoms of impaired cerebral blood circulation, severe psychiatric disease, and previous bone marrow or PBPC transplantation. 


Patients and study population 

During the study period, a total of 100 patients underwentPBPC mobilization and harvest. Of these patients, 58 met the inclusion criteria regarding diagnosis and mobilization regimen. Forty-five patients gave informed consent and were randomly assigned. One patient had no mobilizable PBPCs, 1 patient did not meet the inclusion criteria, and 2 did not undergo a leukapheresis of appropriate size, because of technical errors (Fig. In 2 of the 41 remaining patients, CD34+ cell counts after leukapheresis were not performed. Twenty-six patients had BC and 15 patients had NHL. Twenty-two patients with BC were treated in an adjuvant setting because of high-risk disease; the other 4 patients were eligible for high-dose chemotherapy (HDCT) because of high-risk locoregional relapse. One additional patient with follicular lymphoma presented with relapse after conventional chemotherapy. Three patients with diffuse large-cell lymphoma and persistent disease after standard chemotherapy and two with a chemotherapy-sensitive relapse were included. One patient had mantle cell lymphoma and one presented with a malignant lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue. 


Mobilization and leukapheresis 

All patients underwent mobilization with chemotherapy and G–CSF. High-dose cyclophosphamide (4 g/ m²) as single-agent mobilization was given to 2 patients with NHL. The numbers of CD34+ cells before leukapheresis and in the leukapheresis component were evaluated in all 82 harvest procedures. Patients with low-grade NHL underwent conditioning with total body irradiation (12 Gy) and highdose cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg BW). After mobilization and progenitor cell harvest, two patients with NHL and two with BC were not eligible for HDCT and PBPC transplantation because of progressive disease. One patient underwent transplantation twice, and thus a total of 38 PBPC transplantations were performed in 37 patients. In patients undergoing harvest in complete remission, the bag containing the maximum number of PBPCs and the smallest volume was chosen for transfusion. In patients with partial remission or initial bone marrow involvement, PBPCs were collected again after further cycles of chemotherapy. In all but three of these patients, the NVL was scheduled on Day 2. In addition, the number of CD34+ cells per µL of peripheral blood before leukapheresis was significantly higher in these 12 patients (p<0.01) before NVL than before LVL. The median number of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral blood before leukapheresis did not differ for either group of patients or either procedure. But patients with BC had significantly higher (p = 0.012 and p = 0.028, respectively) median numbers of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral blood before leukapheresis than patients with NHL had (LVL: 61 vs. Considering this value for the two patient groups separately, in patients with BC, the median number of CFU–GM per kg of BW after cryopreservation was significantly higher in the patients undergoing LVL than in those undergoing NVL (3.5 vs. In 36 patients, 37 transplantations with PBPCs alone were performed. One patient with BC underwent transplantation twice. After a median of 10 days (range, 9-16), all other patients had a WBC count >1,000 per µL in peripheral blood. Twenty-five transplantations were performed in 24 patients with grafts from study leukapheresis procedures alone. Seventeen patients, 14 with BC and 3 with NHL, received a graft from an LVL. During LVL, patients received significant amounts of heparin. Nevertheless, some data showed that sufficient amounts of PBPCs for transplantation can be harvested by a single LVL in most pediatric patients after mobilization with G–CSF alone39 and in adult patients with NHL, Hodgkin’s disease, or acute lymphoblastic leukemia after mobilization with chemotherapy and G–CSF. These figures were lower when only the patients with BC were considered. An explanation might be the different mobilization regimens and the differences in previous chemotherapy between our study patients and the reported data. 


Our data suggest that patients with BC and with high numbers of CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood before leukapheresis obviously profit from a substantial recruitment of PBPCs during an LVL, whereas other patients do not. It would be highly desirable to identify the latter patients before leukapheresis.

