

Peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPC) transplantation has become a widely accepted therapeutic
option for patients with  chemotherapy-sensitive malignancies. The transfusion of PBPCs offers
several advantages over bone marrow transplantation.  Several  studies have been able to demonstrate
a good correlation between the number of CD34+ cells in the harvest and the number of  CFU–GM. Until
now, the minimal number of transplanted PBPCs required for safe and sustained engraftment remains to
be  determined. 


The yield of CD34+ cells obtained by leukapheresis is significantly influenced by the extent and
duration of prior  chemotherapy, therapy with stem cell-toxic drugs such as carmustine or melphalan,
and extensive radiotherapy. 


We therefore performed a prospective, randomized, sequential crossover trial in patients with breast
cancer (BC) or  non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) to evaluate the effect of LVL compared with
normal-volume leukapheresis (NVL) on the absolute  number of harvested CD34+ cells and on the
extraction efficacy, defined as the difference between the yield in the harvest  and the decrease in
the total number of CD34+ cells in peripheral blood during leukapheresis.


Inclusion criteria for patients with NHL were large-cell lymphoma  with persistent disease after
standard chemotherapy or at relapse or low-grade NHL stage III/IV and progressive disease. Exclusion
criteria Exclusion criteria were refractoriness to platelet  transfusion, disorders of blood
coagulation, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia, disease manifestation in the central nervous system,
fever >38.5°C within 48 hours before leukapheresis, dilatative cardiomyopathy, symptomatic ischemic
heart  disease, heart attack within 6 months before leukapheresis, chronic lung disease with
hypoxemia, severe drug-resistant  hypertension, severe nonadjustable diabetes, epileptic seizures,
impairment of renal function with serum creatinine >2.0 mg  per dL, elevation of liver enzymes >3
times the normal value and/or a bilirubin value >2.0 mg per dL, clinical symptoms of  impaired
cerebral blood circulation, severe psychiatric disease, and previous bone marrow or PBPC
transplantation.


Of these patients, 58 met the  inclusion criteria regarding diagnosis and mobilization regimen. One
patient had no mobilizable PBPCs, 1 patient did  not meet the inclusion criteria, and 2 did not
undergo a leukapheresis of appropriate size, because of technical errors (Fig.  1). Seven patients
of  the NHL group had stage IV follicular lymphoma and were included in an ongoing randomized trial
comparing the effect of HDCT  to that of conventional chemotherapy. Three patients with diffuse
large-cell lymphoma and persistent disease after standard chemotherapy  and two with a
chemotherapy-sensitive relapse were included. 


On the second day after the end of chemotherapy, subcutaneous administration of G–CSF at a dose of 5
to 10 µg per kg of BW  per day was started and continued until the last day of leukapheresis. 


Laboratory methods.


Patients with low-grade NHL underwent conditioning with  total body irradiation (12 Gy) and highdose
cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg BW). 


Calculations were performed with a software  program (Statistical Analysis System, version 6.12, SAS
Institute, Cary, NC). Results were considered to be significantlydifferent when the p value was
below 0.05.


With Day 1 and Day 2 leukapheresis procedures taken together, one transplantation dose and a back-up
dose were collected in  all patients with BC, but in only 11 of the 15 patients with NHL (p = 0.026,
chi-square test with Yates’s correction). Twenty-five transplantations were performed in 24 patients
with grafts from study leukapheresis  procedures alone. Of the 6 patients being given grafts from an
NVL, only 3  with BC had sufficient numbers of PBPCs in one-half of the collection, the others, 2
with BC and 1 with NHL, received a total  harvest. 


When all procedures were  considered, the median number of CD34+ cells and the median extraction
efficacy were significantly higher in LVL than in NVL.  Our observation that the  extraction
efficacy of LVL differed in patients with BC and those with NHL may help to explain conflicting data
in the  literature. 


Preliminary data (Humpe A, manuscript in preparation) suggest that the decrease in CD34+ cell
numbers in peripheral blood during leukapheresis and the increase in the numbers in the collection
bag can be well described by a cell-kinetic model consisting of the three distributional
compartments, bone marrow, peripheral blood, and extracorporeal volume. With the help of such a
model, a better prediction of the yield of CD34+ cells on the basis of values such as number of
CD34+ cells, total peripheral blood volume, flow rate, and duration of leukapheresis may be possible
in the future. 


The difference in extraction efficacy between the BC and NHL patient groups could be an explanation
for the different correlation coefficients between preapheresis numbers of CD34+ cells per µL in
peripheral blood and the  CD34+ cell yield in the harvest. The leukapheresis size, the obviously
varied extent of recruitment of PBPCs during the harvest, and the different extraction efficacies
may influence the relationship between preleukapheresis numbers of CD34+ cells and the yield in the
PBPC harvest. Nevertheless, some data showed that sufficient amounts of PBPCs for transplantation
can be harvested by a single LVL in most pediatric patients after mobilization with G–CSF alone39
and in adult patients with NHL, Hodgkin’s disease, or acute lymphoblastic leukemia after
mobilization with chemotherapy and G–CSF. With both leukapheresis procedures taken together, none of
the patients with BC failed to achieve 2 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW, but, in the NHL group, 26.7
percent of the patients still did not achieve a transplantation dose and a back-up dose. Recently
published data18 showed that prior exposure to chemotherapy, especially to DexaBEAM, or prior
radiotherapy has a significant influence on the yield of PBPCs. Recent data15 suggest that
hematopoietic toxicity, platelettransfusion support, and quality of life may be positively
influenced by the return of more than 15 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW after HDCT. 
