

We appreciate the opportunity to respond to Dr Medalie¡¯s and Dr Ackerman¡¯s curious and premature attempt
to discredit sentinel node biopsy. For 30 years we have struggled with the problem of managing clinically
normal regional lymph nodes in patients with primary cutaneous melanoma. Our efforts have produced a
minimally invasive procedure that has been universally adopted by most academic and community-based surgical
oncologists and pathologists.and enthusiastically welcomed by the patients they treat. Our extensive
published studies on the evolution and application of the sentinel node concept have been validated not
only by the peer-review process required for publication in respected scientific journals but also by
multiple peer-reviewed studies subsequently published by other investigators.Although Drs Medalie and
Ackerman are certainly entitled to their opinion and are skilled at its forceful expression, they have
made no attempt to refute the scientifically-based data that underpin the development and conduct of
preoperative and intraoperative lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy (LM/SL), and their repetitious
conclusions are ex cathedra and presented without factual basis. Repeatedly saying that something is
true or false does not make it so, no matter how vehemently it is stated. The nature of their argument
suggests that Drs Medalie and Ackerman are either unaware of the extensive literature on LM/SL or unwilling
to accept its consensus. 



Elective vs. therapeutic vs. sentinel lymph node dissection 

The claim that sentinel node biopsy is the same as elective lymph node dissection (ELND) reflects a limited
understanding of this area of surgical oncology. ELND is the surgical removal of an entire regional group
of clinically tumour-free lymph nodes; the premise is that the primary cutaneous melanoma has risk factors
(e.g. intermediate thickness, ulceration) which increase the likelihood that it will have spread to the
regional nodes. For reasons discussed below, ELND is not accurate for nodal staging but was previously
justified by its possible therapeutic value. However, unless preoperative lymphoscintigraphy is performed,
ELND is a blind procedure that may not remove the correct nodal basin. Moreover, its potential morbidity
is substantial especially considering that 80.90% of patients (depending upon the thickness of the primary
melanoma) cannot benefit because they have no nodal metastases. This is in stark contrast to the sentinel
node procedure, which is associated with almost no morbidity.a fact that seems to have escaped Drs Medalie
and Ackerman. As we previously reported, and as Drs Medalie and Ackerman point out, prospective controlled
studies of ELND have not demonstrated a survival advantage for all primary melanoma patients treated
this way. Nonetheless, a subset of individuals with limited tumour burden may benefit. We remind Drs
Medalie and Ackerman of the results of the Intergroup Melanoma Surgical Trial, a randomized study that
demonstrated a survival benefit of ELND for prospectively defined subgroups of melanoma patients. 

Therapeutic lymph node dissection removes the regional nodes from patients who have detectable nodal
metastases. This confers some therapeutic advantage and can lead to prolonged survival, to a degree that
is inversely related to the number of tumour-involved nodes.

Sentinel node biopsy, which we prefer to describe as preoperative and intraoperative lymphatic mapping
and sentinel lymphadenectomy, is a staging and diagnostic procedure that samples the sentinel node (SN).
The SN is the first regional lymph node on the direct lymphatic drainage pathway from the primary melanoma.the
node which is most likely to contain any tumour cells that have metastasized from the primary. LM/SL
is designed to identify clinically occult metastases. As noted above, this procedure has little or no
morbidity when performed by experienced surgical oncologists, and its diagnostic accuracy far exceeds
that of blind ELND because the SN specimen is small enough for a highly focused examination by histopathology,
immunohistology and molecular biology methods.

LM/SL is NOT the same as selective complete lymph node dissection (CLND), the purpose of which is the
therapeutic excision of all nodes within the regional basin of a patient whose nodal metastases have
already been identified by LM/SL staging. Remember that LM/SL was developed and is currently accepted
as a staging technique that avoids CLND in approximately 80% of patients without metastases in the SN.
It is theoretically possible that this procedure might also be therapeutic if regional metastasis is
confined to the SN, and this possibility is currently under study in a Phase III multicentre trial sponsored
by a National Institutes of Health Program Project grant. However, if metastasis in the regional nodal
basin beyond a tumour-positive SN is suspected or confirmed, regional nodal surgery beyond the SN procedure
is, by definition, a therapeutic lymph node dissection. That Drs Medalie and Ackerman fail to grasp this
distinction is surprising. 

It is claimed that if END is bereft of benefit, so, too, it must be for SNB followed by RND. This bald
and unsupported statement ignores the diagnostic utility of LM/SL and discloses the absence of any real
understanding of the scientific method of clinical investigation. The statement may be true but is clearly
susceptible to scientific proof. Ongoing trials will answer this question with a degree of certainty
that cannot come from flamboyant dialectics. 

Any attempt to discredit LM/SL for a lack of possible impact on survival/cure ignores the undisputed
potential clinical benefit of early cancer diagnosis. Are Drs Medalie and Ackerman suggesting that we
withhold assessment of the regional tumour-draining lymph nodes until they become clinically suspicious?
Do they truly countenance this type of passive therapeutic nihilism? Such an approach would allow disease
to advance from a relatively early clinical stage that can be readily diagnosed by LM/SL and is amenable
to therapy, to more advanced and potentially untreatable stages. Are we being asked to discount or ignore
the peer-reviewed literature?

Even though the chance of long-term survival is inversely related to the tumour burden within regional
nodes, Drs Medalie and Ackerman apparently would have us wait until a patient develops multiple palpable
(and thus relatively burdensome) metastases with a concomitant decrease in the chance of long-term survival.
Since virtually all patients who have SN micrometastases detectable by LM/SL will eventually develop
clinically detectable nodal metastases if managed only by wide excision and observation, what do they
propose? Surely they would not leave a patient with grossly involved, melanoma-filled lymph nodes untreated
by surgery. If the patient is going to require therapeutic CLND within 12.31 months after wide excision
(the period of latency before clinical evidence of nodal metastases, as indicated by our own published
findings as well as the inappropriately maligned assertions of Drs Pack and Balch) (Table 1), why leave
that patient untreated and at risk of dissemination from the nodal metastases for such a long period
of time? Their premise is that all patients with nodal metastases also have distant metastases and eventually
will die of melanoma; therefore, all attempts at surgical therapy of the regional nodes are futile. If
we are to believe this (and ignore the available peer-reviewed studies), even microscopic metastasis
to regional lymph nodes must inevitably be accompanied by fatal haematogenous metastasis. As shown below,
this is not the case. In fact, from clinical, epidemiological and autopsy studies it is probable that
many tumour cells that spread systemically either fail to survive or form latent or dormant microcolonies
that may never grow sufficiently to become clinically detectable or cause death. It is in their treatment
of the subject of mechanisms and significance of metastases that the authors seem least informed and
their arguments weakest. 



A brief history of lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy 

The single most important prognostic factor for most primary solid neoplasms including melanoma is the
tumour status of regional lymph nodes draining the primary neoplasm (Table 2). Until recently, the only
method to identify regional node metastasis in patients without palpable lymph nodes was ELND and pathological
examination of all excised nodes, usually amounting to examination of one cross-section of each node
by haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. This pathological technique sampled only a small percentage
of the total nodal area and therefore underestimated the true frequency of nodal metastases, but there
was no cost-effective alternative. To improve sensitivity it would be necessary to examine every node
in the lymphadenectomy specimen by serial sections, an approach that would be prohibitively costly and
beyond the workload capacity of pathology departments. 



In addition to its inadequacies as a staging procedure, ELND exposes patients to troublesome postoperative
morbidity.in most cases without the possibility of therapeutic benefit. Only 20% of patients who have
intermediate-thickness primary melanomas and non-palpable regional lymph nodes actually have nodal metastasis
by histology, including immunohistology. The remaining 80% of patients with intermediate melanomas have
tumour-free regional nodes and therefore will be unnecessarily placed at risk for acute wound problems,
chronic oedema, nerve injury and the anaesthetic complications of ELND. 

Our lymphatic studies leading to the SN hypothesis and the selective approach to CLND were initiated
30 years ago. At that time, ELND was avoided for truncal melanomas located in ambiguous sites such as
the midline of the back or close to the umbilicus or shoulder because these tumours can drain to two
or more lymphatic basins. In 1977, we described the use of cutaneous lymphoscintigraphy to identify the
lymph basins at risk for metastasis from truncal primary melanomas and the concept of using the tumour
status of the node of Cloquet as the indicator node to select patients for deep iliac/obturator LN dissection.
We found that lymphatic drainage often did not follow the expected anatomical pattern; thus, for example,
a melanoma on the right back might drain to the left axilla, or a melanoma of the knee might drain to
an ectopic lymph node in the mid-thigh rather than to the inguinal nodes. Our initial studies of radiopharmaceutical-
based mapping of the lymphatics suggested that lymphatic pathways from the primary tumour to the regional
lymphatic basin initially drained to one or two lymph nodes. In animal studies, we found that intradermal
injection of isosulfan blue or patent blue dye optimally stained the afferent lymphatic channels and
one or two regional lymph nodes. Regional nodes were stained in a sequential and temporal fashion, and
thus we identified the SN as the first blue-stained lymph node within the lymphatic basin reached by
a blue-stained afferent lymphatic channel draining the primary lesion. Although Cabanas and others had
used the term sentinel to identify nodes in a fixed anatomic location in penile cancer, our concept described
the SN by its function rather than its location. Each SN is unique because its location varies with the
cutaneous location of the primary melanoma and with the inconsistent lymphatic drainage patterns of different
patients. Thus identification of the SN requires a dynamic individualized mapping approach. 

In the early 1980s we developed S-100 protein as the first practical immunohistochemical marker for 
cells of melanocytic lineage. Staining for S-100 demonstrated the presence of occult melanoma cells in
regional nodes at a frequency higher than previously appreciated on the basis of H&E evaluation. We also
noted that when the absolute amount of melanoma present in the node group was small, tumour was present
in only one or two nodes.usually the nodes closest to the primary tumour. These proximal, tumour-containing
nodes were also immunosuppressed, as indicated by selective reduction of the area of the nodal paracortex
and reductions in the density and dendritic complexity of antigen-presenting para-cortical dendritic
leucocytes.

When we introduced LM/SL in 1990, as a presentation to the Society of Surgical Oncology, this technique
was designed to provide a cost-effective, minimally morbid but highly accurate solution to the controversy
surrounding the use of ELND as a staging procedure in malignant melanoma. LM/SL evolved from our hypothesis
that a primary melanoma metastasizing via the lymphatics will lodge in the first lymph nodes on the direct
lymphatic drainage pathway from the primary cutaneous site, before spreading to other nodes further along
the lymphatic chain. Thus, the tumour status of this index node.the SN.will indicate the tumour status
of the entire lymphatic basin. 

Our first published study of LM/SL in 1992 described the results of dye-directed LM/SL in 237 lymphatic
basins of 223 patients with primary cutaneous melanoma.Patients underwent preoperative dynamic lymphoscintigraphy
to identify the basin of lymphatic drainage, localize specific SNs within this basin, and avoid missing
aberrant draining lymph nodes. At the time of surgery, vital blue dye was injected around the primary
melanoma. Intraoperative dye-directed LM identified a SN in 194 (82%) lymphatic basins. Forty of these
basins (21%) had tumour-positive SNs. Only two lymphatic basins had tumour-negative SNs in the presence
of tumour-positive non-SNs, a false-negative rate of 1.0%. 

Although this seminal work was undertaken with vital dyes as the mapping agents, our group and other
investigators have since reported the combined use of radiopharmaceuticals and blue dye for mapping the
SN. Data from an ongoing Phase III international trial (MSLT-I) have confirmed and validated that LM/SL
with a vital blue dye and radiopharmaceutical identifies and removes the first lymph node in the lymphatic
pathway from the primary tumour site in 99% of patients with primary melanoma. Focused histological 
evaluation based on immunohistochemical staining and molecular analysis of multiple sections of this
SN is more likely to reveal nodal metastasis than is routine H&E staining of limited sections from the
12-40 bivalved nodes identified in a conventional ELND specimen. 



Staging based on lymphatic mapping and sentinel lymphadenectomy: the patient¡¯s right to an informed
decision 

Studies of LM/SL in melanoma, breast cancer, colon cancer, and virtually all solid neoplasms that spread
to the lymph nodes have confirmed the SN concept of an orderly progression of metastatic cells from the
primary site through the lymphatics to one or two SNs in the regional nodal basin. 

This means that a focused histopathological and molecular assessment of the SN can provide staging information
far more accurate than that provided by random nodal biopsy or standard pathology assessment of the ELND
specimen. For this reason, the staging information provided by LM/SL recently has been incorporated into
the American Joint Committee on Cancer¡¯s (AJCC¡¯s) staging system for cutaneous melanoma. 

Drs Medalie and Ackerman apparently have little confidence in the AJCC staging system or in the 17 000-patient
database used to validate this system. They stubbornly cling to their notion that melanoma metastatic
to the regional lymph nodes is always associated with a fatal outcome. However, although 'we are all
dead in the end', a newly diagnosed patient still wants an informed estimate of his or her life-expectancy
and risk of dying from melanoma. Unlike Drs Medalie and Ackerman, who apparently expect 100% prognostic
accuracy, the patient realizes that the oncologist¡¯s evaluation is an estimate and thus cannot be absolutely
precise. No diagnostic or prognostic test is completely accurate. The ability of even the most competent
dermatopathologist to differentiate between a benign or malignant melanocytic lesion will occasionally
be questioned when a patient with a reportedly benign lesion subsequently develops fatal metastases 
(a fallibility that Drs Medalie and Ackerman accept). 

Again, we take issue with the assertion that the tumour status of the SN has no clinical relevance. 
Based upon 215 patients seen by our group before 1994, if the lymph node is positive by pathology or
immunohistopathology, the chance of recurrence is 60%; if the node is positive only by molecular methods,
the chance of recurrence is at least 50% (Fig. 1). By contrast, if this node is negative by both histopathological
and molecular techniques, by 8 years the chance of recurrence is only 10% and the chance of survival
is 96%. These highly significant differences in prognosis between SN-positive and SN-negative survival
(P < 0.001) represent valuable information for a patient who is attempting to make an informed decision
about the future and explore treatment options. If the SN contains a metastasis, the chance of survival
of 15 years or longer will be 40.70% depending upon the number of involved lymph nodes and their tumour
burden. However, if the SN is negative by both histopathology and molecular methods,the chance of long-term
survival will be 90% or more (Fig. 1). 

There are no absolutes in medicine, which is why we have an informed consent process in which the patient
can learn about choices and chances. During the preoperative informed-consent discussion with our patients,
we state that the therapeutic utility of LM/SL and selective CLND has not been proven at this time. At
this time we certainly do not know whether the SN procedure is therapeutic. This contrasts with Drs 
Medalie and Ackerman, who claim to know that it is not therapeutic, although they do not choose to share
with us the source of that critical information and provide no data to support their assertions. However,
LM/SL can indicate with a high degree of accuracy whether the patient has nodal metastases and thereby
help establish the risk of recurrence. From our experience, almost all patients choose to undergo LM/SL
because they want this information about the extent of their disease and its risk of recurrence. Thus,
LM/SL has become a standard staging procedure in cancer centres throughout the world. 



The timing of lymph node dissection: incubator vs. marker hypotheses 

As advocated more than a century ago by British surgeon Herbert L. Snow, routine ELND in patients without
clinical evidence of regional metastasis should interrupt the metastatic cascade. Multiple retrospective
single-institution studies lend support to Snow¡¯s approach, reporting a survival advantage when patients
without evidence of nodal metastasis undergo routine ELND. However, if metastatic melanoma does not frequently
spread first to the regional nodes before spreading to distant sites as biologically relevant progressive
disease, then ELND may not be justified. In fact, randomized prospective clinical trials have failed
to show an overall survival benefit for all melanoma patients undergoing ELND, although a subset of 
individuals with limited tumour burden may benefit. 

We have considered two possible paths of metastasis from a primary melanoma (Fig. 2). According to the
incubator hypothesis, the primary tumour spreads primarily to sentinel nodes in the regional lymph basin,
where the metastatic tumour cells may survive and grow slowly or remain latent before, in some patients,
spreading to distant sites. Less frequently melanoma cells may spread directly from the primary to distant
sites. However, according to the marker hypothesis, a primary melanoma metastasizes simultaneously via
lymphatic and haematogenous routes, so that the presence of nodal metastases becomes a marker rather
than a precursor of clinically relevant and progressive systemic disease. 

Although the incubator hypothesis is compatible with a therapeutic benefit for ELND, if too much time
has elapsed before the nodes are removed, it is more likely that distant progressive metastases will
already have occurred. Conversely, if the primary melanoma is thin, the likelihood of nodal metastasis
is very small and few such patients could benefit from early ELND. Thus, the proportion of all patients
with primary melanoma who might benefit from early removal of clinically normal regional lymph nodes
(ELND) is only 4-7%, depending on the T stage of the primarymelanoma. The following calculation shows
the derivation of this proportion from data in Table 3 and Figure 3: 

100 % - [(the proportion of patients without nodal micrometastases) +         (the proportion of patients
with nodal metastases and systemic metastases) +         (the proportion of patients whose metastases
will never extend beyond the           regional basins and will exhibit long-termsurvival following delayed
resection          of macroscopic (palpable) nodes)] 



Therapeutic potential of lymph node dissection 

We agree with Drs Medalie and Ackerman that no prospective randomized trial has yet demonstrated a conclusive
overall benefit for ELND in all patients with early-stage melanoma. We believe that this reflects a 
problem of trial design. The question is not whether ELND is beneficial to all patients, but whether
a particular patient is likely to benefit because that patient has subclinical regional nodal metastasis
without progressive systemic metastasis. 

Drs Medalie and Ackerman argue eloquently for the marker hypothesis (on the basis of no discernible data)
and state unequivocally that patients with lymph node metastasis also have systemic spread of disease
and will die of melanoma (if they don¡¯t die of something else first). We rebut their speculation with
the data that are conspicuously absent from their presentation. Regarding the inevitability of death
due to melanoma, we have consulted the John Wayne Cancer Institute¡¯s (JWCI¡¯s) computerized melanoma
database. This database contains the records of all 11 000 patients seen by our staff since April 1971.
Follow-up is complete to within 30 months of last visit or death for 94% of patients in the database.
The database thus represents a 30-year prospective audit of the results of therapy by JWCI staff. The
rate of 25-year survival (the longest period with adequate numbers of patients on follow-up) associated
with lymph node dissection for palpable nodal metastases (CLND) is 29 ¡¾ 1.5%, compared with 42 ¡¾ 3%
for patients with positive but clinically nonpalpable nodes. These data clearly indicate that not all
patients with locoregional metastatic melanoma develop distant metastases and die of melanoma, and thereby
refute Dr Medalie¡¯s and Dr Ackerman¡¯s therapeutic nihilism. 

JWCI data are compatible with an interesting report from Meier et al. who reviewed their 20-year database
of 3001 patients with primary cutaneous melanoma to identify 466 patients who developed clinical evidence
of metastases. Of the 466 patients, 71.9% developed locoregional metastases as the first clinical manifestation
of disease spread. However, only 59% of those with regional nodal metastases subsequently developed distant
metastases, which suggests that metastatic disease in 41% of patients was not present beyond the regional
nodes to a degree that permitted progressive systemic growth at the time of therapeutic lymphadenectomy.
These observations are consistent with the incubator hypothesis and confirm that not all patients with
regional nodal metastases develop distant metastases. The fact that the median interval before clinical
metastasis was longer for directly spread distant disease than for regional nodal disease (25 months
vs. 16 months) further suggests that nodal metastasis precedes distant metastasis in many patients. Because
the report of Meier¡¯s group was based on a clinical staging protocol, there were no data on the incidence
of occult (immunohistopathological or molecular) SN metastases in patients with direct distant disease
or in-transit metastatic disease. We have found that many patients with in-transit metastases have occult
nodal metastases detectable by LM/SL. For these reasons, we do not agree with the conclusions of Meier
et al.;instead, we believe that their clinical findings support the SN hypothesis and the use of diagnostic
LM/SL followed by therapeutic CLND when the SN contains tumour. 

Because our LM/SL investigations began in 1985, we already have 15-year follow-up data. The 15-year 
rate of survival from wide excision of primary melanoma, LM/SL and immediate CLND for occult metastases
in the SN is 69%, compared with only 32% after wide excision and delayed CLND for palpable nodal metastases
(Fig. 3). This comparison is based on patients matched by the most widely accepted important prognostic
factors: age and sex, primary T stage and ulceration, and number of tumour-involved lymph nodes (Table
3). If the marker hypothesis were correct, then there should have been no difference in survival between
the two groups; however, we found a 22% survival difference at 5 years (73% vs. 51%), which gradually
increased to a 37% difference at 15 years (32% vs. 69%). Thus, if only 20% of the patients had lymph
node metastasis, then the possible overall therapeutic benefit of immediate vs. delayed CLND for all
patients with primary cutaneous melanoma varies from 4.4% at 5 years (20% of 22%) to 7.4% at 15 years
(20% of 37%). These data are fully compatible with the findings of Cascinelli et al. (WHO Melanoma Group),
whose randomized trial compared survival after immediate vs. delayed lymphadenectomy for nodal metastases
(Fig. 4). 

None of the ELND trials thus far reported have been large enough to demonstrate significantly an overall
survival difference of only 4-7% between the two treatment arms for the entire study group of melanoma
patients. Because patients without nodal metastases cannot benefit from ELND, demonstration of significant
differences would require more than 1000 patients in each arm. Even the Multicentre Selective Lymphadenectomy
Trial (MSLT), which completed accrual in March of 2002, has only 80% power to detect a statistically
significant difference in overall survival between patients who underwent wide excision alone vs. those
who underwent wide excision and LM/SL (plus CLND if the SN was positive). 

Moreover, as discussed above, the chance of metastasis to the regional nodes varies dramatically with
the thickness of the primary lesion (Table 1). Because patients with thin primary melanomas have a low
risk of nodal metastasis, routine ELND could produce only a small increase in survival rate. Patients
with thick primary lesions are more likely to have overtly tumour-involved regional nodes and a higher
risk of distant metastasis. Removal of the regional nodes seems unlikely to affect overall survival 
in the presence of substantial and progressive distant metastases, although the effect on survival of
patients with tiny or latent metastases remains to be determined. 

Recognizing these issues, we are about to launch a follow-up to the MSLT. MSLT-II will have enough patients
to determine whether complete removal of the regional lymph nodes is of therapeutic benefit in patients
with lymph node metastases identified by LM/SL. The trial (Fig. 5) will enrol at least 4200 patients
at major cancer centres in the United States, Europe and Australia. It is possible that LM/SL alone 
will prove therapeutic in the vast majority of patients with primary melanomas <= 2.01 mm in thickness,
since most of these patients will have metastases only in the SN, rendering CLND unnecessary. But what
about patients whose SN is positive but who also may have metastases in non-SNs of the same regional
basin? Will early removal of nonpalpable metastases be of benefit? We will have the answer in another
5-10 years if most of the world¡¯s major melanoma centres join MSLT-II. This trial has been awarded 
funding from the National Cancer Institute. Investigators interested in joining MSLT-II should contact
mortond@jwci.org. 



Metastasis, immune suppression, genetic and host factors 

During the past few years, we have learned a great deal regarding the pathophysiology of metastasis from
the primary melanoma to the regional SNs and to distant sites. The primary melanoma produces immunosuppressive
factors, as we hypothesized some years ago. Thus the nodes anatomically closest to a primary melanoma
are immunosuppressed, rendering them vulnerable to metastatic colonization (Fig. 2). This immunosuppression
is also evident in the functionally defined SN, i.e. the node most exposed to the tumour¡¯s influence
via the direct drainage lymphatic pathway from the primary melanoma. Immune down-regulation is evidenced
in multiple ways but especially in the density and maturity of interdigitating dendritic cells (IDC)
and T cells in the SNs (Fig. 6). We believe this immunosuppression leads to a reduction in host immunity
that contributes to the successful implantation and growth of micrometastases in the SN. Once the volume
of metastatic tumour cells in the SN exceeds a critical mass, the production of immunosuppressive factors
can lead to further immunosuppression of lymph nodes along the lymphatic chain, and then to micrometastatic
involvement of additional lymph nodes, which increases the risk of systemic immunosuppression and the
progressive growth of haematogenously spread tumour cells. This interaction could explain the significantly
increased number of tumour-involved nodes and relatively unfavourable survival when CLND is delayed and
then performed to remove palpable rather than subclinical metastases (Table 1).

After the development of substantial and progressive systemic metastases, surgical removal of the regional
nodes should not influence the growth of distant metastases (unless these are relatively small and composed
of tumour cells susceptible to rejection by host immune defences), nor change the long-term melanoma-
specific survival. Thus, the patients who are most likely to derive benefit from LM/SL are those in whom
nodal metastases are still incubating. in the SN prior to systemic spread. Because the incidence of
nodal metastases depends largely on the thickness of the primary melanoma (Table 1), lymph node removal
should have little effect on melanoma-specific survival when the primary tumour is very thin. Few of
these patients have nodal micrometastases; in the vast majority, the primary is removed before the melanoma
has an opportunity to spread to the regional nodes. Conversely, patients with thick (> 4 mm) primary
cutaneous melanomas are unlikely to benefit from ELND because the risk of concurrent metastasis beyond
the regional lymph nodes is high. However, this leaves a group of patients with intermediate-thickness
primary melanomas, whose metastatic disease is limited to the regional node basin and to the SN within
that basin. In these patients, early removal of the SN should abort the metastatic cascade. But how can
we identify these patients? We developed LM/SL as a solution to this dilemma. 

Although primary tumour size is probably the most important factor in determining the risk of regional
and systemic metastases, it is not the sole factor. Genetic changes in the primary melanoma associated
with activation of various growth-factor oncogenes are involved, as is the patient¡¯s endogenous immune
response. Even palpable nodal metastases may be confined to the regional nodes by immune defences that
inhibit the implantation and growth of blood-borne circulating tumour cells (Fig. 2), or because genetic
characteristics of the metastatic clone make tumour cells unable to adhere to the vascular endothelium
and grow at distant sites. These factors could explain why a clinically palpable (2.3 cm) nodal metastasis
containing more than 10 billion melanoma cells can exist without additional nodal or systemic involvement,
and why therapeutic lymph node dissection can be followed by survival of 25 years or more without recurrence.




Staging with respect to postoperative adjuvant therapy 

Although we agree with Drs Medalie and Ackerman with regard to the modest efficacy and high toxicity
of high-dose interferon in the management of patients with nodal metastasis, we hope that current randomized
trials with new adjuvant immunotherapeutic agents such as Canvaxin therapeutic polyvalent cancer vaccine
will improve the clinical outcome. The design of trials of postoperative adjuvant therapies requires
entry criteria based on accurate staging of disease. A patient whose disease is accurately staged can
benefit by immediate enrolment in a trial of a potentially effective therapy.a therapy that otherwise
would not be available until after the trial is completed, which in an adjuvant setting might be many
years hence. The repeatedly stated position of Drs Medalie and Ackerman in this regard is thus curious
and perhaps unduly pessimistic. 



Sentinel node evaluation to aid assessment of the malignant potential of an indeterminate melanocytic
lesion 

The use of LM/SL to help differentiate a benign from a malignant melanocytic skin lesion has been found
useful in rare circumstances when the pathologist cannot give a definitive diagnosis of melanoma or a
benign lesion. We do not share the widely broadcast opinion that close inspection of melanocytic lesions
by an informed eye will always allow accurate assignment to benign or malignant categories. If the pathologist
cannot be 100% confident of the diagnosis, we recommend treating the lesion as a possible malignancy
with a wider excision and LM/SL. In these rare instances, the information provided by SN evaluation can
assist patient, surgeon and pathologist in determining the appropriate course of management. If the node
is negative or contains capsular/trabecular naevus, no additional regional surgery is required and the
patient can be reassured. If the node contains true intraparenchymal metastases, CLND is offered and
adjuvant therapy discussed. Again, the stated views and rhetoric of Drs Medalie and Ackerman are unnecessarily
excessive. 



In closing 

The use of LM/SL in the management of primary cutaneous melanoma is based on its proven ability to provide
more precise staging and prognostic information, on its potential therapeutic benefit in patients whose
metastasis is limited to the SN, and.in special and rare circumstances.its value for assisting in the
differentiation between benign and malignant melanocytic lesions of the skin. We therefore believe that
LM/SL has been shown to have an important role in the staging of primary cutaneous melanoma and in prediction
of likely clinical course. Its accuracy for staging and prognosis has been validated in multicentre 
trials and by multiple investigators in the United States, Europe and Australia.

Our data indicate that 50-80% of melanoma patients with microscopic nodal metastases detected by LM/SL
will be alive and well 15-25 years later and may never manifest recurrent melanoma, the exact percentages
varying with the number of tumour-involved nodes. Therefore, LM/SL may also have therapeutic utility
in patients whose primary lesion has spread to the regional lymph nodes; however, the presence and magnitude
of a therapeutic benefit cannot be determined until the results of the randomized MSLT-I and II trials
are complete. 

Rather than recommend immediate abandonment of the sentinel node procedure, a technique that is justified
by its usefulness in staging the regional nodes and determining prognosis (whether or not it proves to
be therapeutic), Dr Medalie and Dr Ackerman would be well advised to await outcome analysis of the current
Phase III trials and then resume this dialogue, hopefully in more measured terms, on the basis of facts
rather than speculation. 

Res ipse loquitur 

