

We conducted a prospective, randomised study to compare external and internal radiotherapy with
radical hysterectomy and node dissection. 


Methods.All patients received standard pretreatment evaluation, which included complete blood
analysis, intravenous pyelogram, lymphangiography, cystoscopy, chest radiography, and other tests
when indicated. 


We used the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) clinical staging system to
classify the stage of cancer.7 If there was disagreement about the stage, the case was assigned to
the earlier stage. 468 patients had FIGO stage Ib or IIa disease. 343 of these patients were
enrolled after they had given their informed consent to take part. 


Radiotherapy included, external pelvic irradiation with 18 MV photon beam by the multiportal
technique, one dose of 1820Gy at the isocentre, and two or more portals treated daily. A complete
computerised plane was made, according to the International Commission on Radiation Units and
Measurements report no 38.8 The total dose at point A (external beam plus brachyradiotherapy) ranged
from 70 Gy to 90 Gy (median 76 Gy). When lymphangiography showed common iliac or paraortic
metastases, paraortic lymph nodes were treated with a dose of 45 Gy over 5 weeks and two shaped
opposed fields (AP-PA). 


The pathologist provided us with histological subtypes, grade, depth of invasion, tumour size,
presence of capillary-like-space involvement, paracervical-tissue involvement, and number, site, and
type of lymph-node metastases. Patients who had at least one of the following pathological risk
factors received adjuvant radiotherapy, surgical stage greater than pT2a, less than 3 mm of
uninvolved cervical stroma, cutthrough, and lymph-node metastases. Adjuvant radiotherapy consisted
of external pelvic irradiation (18 MV X-rays) with the multiportal technique, one fraction of
1820 Gy daily, with a total dose of 504 Gy over 56 weeks. 


The primary outcome measures were 5-year overall survival and the rate of complications. The
secondary outcome measure was recurrence of the disease. 


We analysed the rate of complications by the actual treatment delivered to each patient so that we
could assess accurately the type and cause of morbidity associated with each treatment. We used
multivariate Cox regression analysis to assess the effect of cervical size, age, FIGO state,
histological type, grade of differentiation, radiological lymph-node status, and treatment group on
overall survival. 


Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer, 125 were excluded because of age (<30
years, >70 years, n=43), medical illness (n=54), previous or concurrent malignant disease (n=21), or
the referring physicians or patients preference for surgery, radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy
(n=7). After randomisation, there were six protocol violations, two in the surgery group (one
progression before operation and one refusal of any therapy after randomisation) and four in the
radiotherapy group (two patients whose cancer was incorrectly staged and two with synchronous
neoplasia). 


Thus, 169 in the surgery group and 158 in the radiotherapy group underwent the scheduled treatment
(compliance of 98% for surgery and 92% for radiotherapy). 


Adjuvant radiotherapy was done in 62 (54%) of the 114 surgery-group patients who had a cervical
diameter of 4 cm or smaller and in 46 (84%) of 55 surgery-group patients who had a cervical diameter
larger than 4 cm. 19 patients whose cervical diameter was 4 cm or less and three patients whose
cervical diameter was greater than 4 cm had lymph-vascular-space involvement as the only
pathological risk factor, these patients did not receive postoperative irradiation.


Median follow-up was 87 (range 57120) months. The two groups did not differ significantly as
regards squamous histotype, overall 5-year survival rates were 84% in surgery-group patients and 88%
in radiotherapy-group patients, overall disease-free survival was 76% and 78%, respectively. For
rates of adenocarcinoma there was a significant advantage for patients who had surgery compared with
those who had radiotherapy in both overall survival (70% vs 59%, p=005) and disease-free survival
(66% vs 47%, p=002). Results of univariate and multivariate analysis are shown in table 4. 


The median time to recurrence did not differ significantly between the surgery and radiotherapy
groups (20 vs 18 months, p=024). 82% of pelvic recurrences and 61% of the distant ones became
evident within 2 years of the primary treatment. 


Morley and Seskis study, of 446 patients with stage-Ib disease recruited between 1945 and 1975 and
treated with radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy or external irradiation and
brachyradiotherapy, reported crude 5-year survival of 87% and 83%, respectively. 


Surgery also offers other advantages, pelvic relapses can be successfully cured by radiotherapy,
whereas salvage surgery after primary irradiation carries a high rate of failures and severe
morbidity. Radiotherapy also avoids the risks of anaesthesia and the laparotomy scar, and iatrogenic
mortality is rare. 


Morbidity is associated with both treatment strategies, though the most severe complications, such
as operative mortality, urological complications, and tissue damage from irradiation, have been
reduced during the past 20 years. The women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm had the most
unfavourable pathological prognostic factors and were at risk of a relapse independently from any
other clinical factor. 


In Italy, a prospective randomised trial has been under way since 1993 to assess the best adjuvant
treatment (chemotherapy or radiotherapy) for high-risk patients after radical surgery for FIGO stage
IbIIa cancer. 
