The clinical evaluation of the patients was done by the gynaecological surgeon together with the radiation oncologist toavoid bias in the randomisation, in fact, patients with unfavourable clinical characteristics are usually treated by radiotherapy alone. The patients were randomly assigned radical surgery (n=172)or radical radiotherapy (n=171). Patients were also stratified by cervical diameter (4 cm or >4 cm). The codes were revealed after we had obtained the patient’s informed consent. The median total dose of radiation was 47 (range 40–53) Gy during3–5 weeks, depending on the tumour volume and nodal status. A boost of 5–10 Gy was given to the positive nodes. Dissection of the pelvic lymph node consisted of removal of all fatty lymph-node bearing tissue anterior, lateral, and posterior to the common,external, and internal iliac vessels, and anterior to the obturatornerve. Adjuvant radiotherapy consisted of external pelvic irradiation (18 MV X-rays) with the multiportal technique, one fraction of 1·8–2·0 Gy daily, with a total dose of 50·4 Gy over 5–6 weeks. We used 2 test with Yates’ continuity correction to test the association between discrete variables. Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIacervical cancer, 125 were excluded because of age (<30years, >70 years, n=43), medical illness (n=54), previousor concurrent malignant disease (n=21), or the referring physician’s or patient’s preference for surgery, radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy (n=7). After randomisation,there were six protocol violations, two in the surgery group (one progression before operation and one refusal of any therapy after randomisation) and four in theradiotherapy group (two patients whose cancer was incorrectly staged and two with synchronous neoplasia). Five patients in the radiotherapy group did not receive brachyradiotherapy after external irradiation because of unfavourable anatomy and subsequently underwent radical surgery. There were no significant between-group differences in the distribution of factors affecting prognosis (table 1). Of the 145 surgery-group patients withnegative lymphangiography, 27 had nodal metastases, which accounted for a specificity of 95% and a sensitivity of 40%. The overall crude survival for all patients included in the intention-to-treat analysis was 76·5% (258 of 337). The overall and disease-free actuarial 5-year survival for all patients were 83% and 74%, respectively, and did not differ significantly between the groups (figure 2). Six patients were still alive with disease 4–18 months after the diagnosis of relapse. Three patients with recurrence died of intercurrent disease (one aftersuccessful treatment of the recurrence). The median time to recurrence did not differ significantly between the surgery and radiotherapy groups(20 vs 18 months, p=0·24). However, when cervical diameter was taken into account, there were substantial between-group differences in pelvic recurrence. In addition, among women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm, there was a significantly higher rate of pelvic relapse among those who had radiotherapy than among those who had surgery plus adjuvant irradiation (16[70%] vs 9 [53%], p=0·46). Complications were classified according to the glossary of Chassagne and colleagues. In the surgery group, 48 (28%) patients showed severe (grade2–3) morbidity that required medical or surgical treatment, compared with 19 (12%) patients in the radiotherapy group, (p=0·0004, table 3). 
Three (1·7%) surgery-group patients had perioperative complications, one vascular lesion during lymphadenectomy, onepostoperative ureterovaginal fistula, and one fatalpulmonary embolism. Other vesical complications (severe actinic cystitis, stress incontinence,high-pressure bladder) were recorded in two (3%)patients after surgery, 11 (10%) after surgery plusradiotherapy, and in eight (5%) after radiotherapy alone. Pelvic lymphocyst occurred in five (8%) patients after surgery and in five(15%) after surgery plus radiotherapy. These rates suggest that both treatments are equally effective for early-stage cancers (Ib and IIa). In our study, 5-year actuarial survival was the same in the surgery and radiation groups (83%), which suggeststhat there is no treatment of choice with respect to local control of disease. Age is also an important factor, in most cases, cervical carcinomas occur in middle-aged women. 
Radical hysterectomy allows the gonadal function of at least oneovary to be saved, thereby avoiding the effects of early menopause in younger women. Shortening and fibrosis ofthe vagina can be limited if the woman is sexually active. Surgery also offers other advantages, pelvic relapses can be successfullycured by radiotherapy, whereas salvage surgery afterprimary irradiation carries a high rate of failures and severe morbidity. Furthermore, surgery allows the status of the lymph nodes, the most dependent variable associated with survival, to be assessed accurately. By contrast, radiotherapy is easier to deliver for patients who are obese, are elderly, or have severe illness—major contraindications to the surgical approach. Radiotherapy also avoids the risks of anaesthesia and the laparotomyscar, and iatrogenic mortality is rare. 
