Stage Ib and IIa carcinoma of the cervix can be cured by radical surgery or radiotherapy with similar effectiveness but the rate and types of complications differ. Radiotherapy is feasible and effective in almost all patients 5-year survival after this therapy ranges from 78 to 91. By contrast radical surgery affords the opportunity to study pathological findings so that groups of at-risk patients who could benefit from adjuvant treatment can be identified. The 5-year cure rate after surgery for early-stage cervical tumours ranges from 54 to 90 in most cases this rate is achieved with adjuvant therapy. Apart from Newtons study about stage-I diseases there have been no randomised studies to compare radiotherapy with radical surgery in one institution over a short period of time. Eligibility criteria were: age 3070 years newly diagnosed stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer no concurrent or previous malignant disease WHO performance status of 1 or less and feasibility of both radical surgery and radiotherapy. The clinical evaluation of the patients was done by the gynaecological surgeon together with the radiation oncologist to avoid bias in the randomisation in fact patients with unfavourable clinical characteristics are usually treated by radiotherapy alone. The patients were randomly assigned radical surgery n172 or radical radiotherapy n171. Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer 125 were excluded because of age 30 years 70 years n43 medical illness n54 previous or concurrent malignant disease n21 or the referring physicians or patients preference for surgery radiotherapy or chemoradiotherapy n7. After randomisation there were six protocol violations: two in the surgery group one progression before operation and one refusal of any therapy after randomisation and four in the radiotherapy group two patients whose cancer was incorrectly staged and two with synchronous neoplasia. Ten patients crossed over treatment: one refused surgery and was irradiated and nine refused radiotherapy and underwent surgery. Thus 169 in the surgery group and 158 in the radiotherapy group underwent the scheduled treatment compliance of 98 for surgery and 92 for radiotherapy. The mean age of patients in the radiotherapy group was slightly greater than that of patients in the surgery group. Lymphangiography revealed positive nodes in 24 14 surgery-group patients and in 22 13 radiotherapy group patients. The two groups did not differ significantly as regards squamous histotype: overall 5-year survival rates were 84 in surgery-group patients and 88 in radiotherapy-group patients overall disease-free survival was 76 and 78 respectively. For rates of adenocarcinoma there was a significant advantage for patients who had surgery compared with those who had radiotherapy in both overall survival 70 vs 59 p005 and disease-free survival 66 vs 47 p002. In addition among women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm there was a significantly higher rate of pelvic relapse among those who had radiotherapy than among those who had surgery plus adjuvant irradiation 16 70 vs 9 53 p046. Complications were classified according to the glossary of Chassagne and colleagues.10 In the surgery group 48 28 patients showed severe grade 23 morbidity that required medical or surgical treatment compared with 19 12 patients in the radiotherapy group p00004 table 3. Grade 2 or 3 complications affected 19 31 patients who had surgery alone and 29 27 patients who received surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy p071. The relative risk of this complication for surgery plus radiotherapy versus surgery alone was 311 95 CI 0711356 and was 201 95 CI 08448 for surgery plus radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone. Chronic neurological bladder was observed in eight 13 patients who had surgery alone and in five 5 patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy. Other vesical complications severe actinic cystitis stress incontinence high-pressure bladder were recorded in two 3 patients after surgery 11 10 after surgery plus radiotherapy and in eight 5 after radiotherapy alone. Ileal obstruction occurred in six 5 patients who underwent surgery plus radiotherapy and in two 1 who received radical radiotherapy. In the radiotherapy group one patient had intestinal perforation one rectovaginal fistula and 12 severe proctites.Severe oedema of the legs occurred in ten 9 patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy in one 06 patient who had radiotherapy alone and in none of the patients who had surgery alone. Abdominal hernia occurred in seven patients of whom four received surgery alone and three received surgery plus radiotherapy. Newton5 reported that the 5-year survival rate for 119 patients with stage-I disease accrued over 10 years in a partly randomised study was 81 for radical surgery and 74 for radiotherapy this difference was not significant. On the other hand the low rate of major complications after radiotherapy 12 suggests that this approach is well-tolerated by most patients. 25 of the surgery-group patients and 26 patients in the radiotherapy group developed neoplastic recurrence. Women whose cervical diameters are larger than 4 cm should be identified before surgery so that they can benefit from tailored treatment: radical radiotherapy with the option of concomitant radiosensitising chemotherapy to improve the local control of the disease or cisplatinbased chemotherapy followed by radical surgery. 
