Vogl et al and Alberts et al using a combination of bleomycin, vincristine,  mitomycin, and cisplatin (BOMP) in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent disease reported high response rates (> 20% of  the patients with a complete response [CR]) with acceptable toxicity. To test this  hypothesis, we began in 1984 at the Instituto Nacional de Cancer (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) a prospective randomized trial  comparing neoadjuvant BOMP CT followed by pelvic RT (CT + RT) versus pelvic RT alone in patients with stage IIIB carcinoma of  the cervix. Patient Entry Criteria and Evaluation
Patients with lymphangiographic findings of  pelvic or paraaortic nodal disease were not excluded. No patient underwent lymph node biopsy to confirm the radiologic  findings. Fifty-two patients were randomized to the CT + RT arm and 55 to the RT arm. In  the CT + RT group, 11 refused further therapy, including pelvic RT, after only one cycle of CT, and two others were found to  have abnormal renal function after randomization and before commencement of treatment. Treatment Regimens
This RT regimen was used for both  groups.

Response Criteria
Patients in the combined modality group were also assessed for local response at the completion of CT and before  the start of RT. Distant disease was defined as disease occuring outside the  pelvis, including paraaortic lymph nodes. Only supportive palliative treatment was given to relapsing patients, and CT was  not used as a salvage treatment for the patients in the RT-only arm.

All patients were observed to determine the efficiency of the combined therapy by comparing overall survival, rate of local  control, incidence of distant metastases, and toxicity between treatment regimens. During RT, patients were assessed weekly  and were questioned about the presence of treatment-related symptoms. Toxicity of CT was assessed before each course. Patients were randomly allocated to the two treatment arms by drawing cards in sealed envelopes. RESULTS
No patient was lost to follow-up. The CR rate was 32.5% and 47% (P = .19) for the RT and CT + RT,  respectively. Seven patients were not included in response assessment in the combined modality group: four patients who died  of CT complications, two who died of metastatic disease, all of them before commencement of RT, and one other patient whose
pelvic disease progressed during CT and who received palliative irradiation only because of poor general condition. The CR  rate after three cycles of BOMP CT was 25.5%.

Evaluation of tumor response by pelvic examination following therapy for advanced cervical cancer is a subjective and  imprecise method of assessment. As of December 1989, 31 of the 52 patients in the RT group and 30 of 39 in the CT + RT had died. It was 39% and 23% for patients randomized to RT and CT + RT, respectively (P  = .02 by the log-rank test). Median survivals were 25 months in the RT arm and 10.5 months in the CT + RT. The 5-year  survival rates for the complete responders were 57% and 36% for the RT and CT + RT groups, respectively. Table 5 shows the  sites of disease failure. It was equally distributed between the treatment arms (RT, 54%; CT + RT, 50%). There was also no  difference in the incidence of distant disease between RT and CT + RT (20% v18.5%).

Toxicity
Acute toxicity was pronounced in the combined treatment arm (Table 6). Five patients (13%) developed such a  complication, and four died as a direct result. The cisplatin treatment day was then changed from day 1 to  day 4 but yet another patient developed the same problem (one of 12 treated patients). Diarrhea was the main complication of pelvic  irradiation, seen in eight patients (15.5%) on RT and 11 (34%) on CT + RT.

Grade 2 3  proctitis was seen more frequently on CT + RT. Postmortem study showed no evidence of  cervical cancer.


Vogl et al'" treated 16 patients with advanced local and/or metastatic cancer of the  uterine cervix. Except for two patients, all others had received previous treatment (CT in two, pelvic RT in 11, and major  surgery in three). Of 13 assessable patients, 10 achieved PRs, with three other patients (23%) obtaining a CR. All responding  patients experienced major symptomatic improvement. Alberts et a119 studied the use of BOMP chemotherapy in 14 previously  treated patients with advanced (stage IVB) and/or recurrent disease and reported a 29% CR rate. Although 25.5% of the patients achieved a CR following three cycles of BOMP and 47% of the CT + RT group obtained a CR at the  end of RT, the 5-year overall survival was significantly inferior in the CT + RT group than in the control arm (39% v 21%, P  = .02). It cannot be accounted for by patient  selection as both groups were well balanced for the wellknown prognostic factors in stage III carcinoma of the cervix.4'24-27  More importantly, all patients in the CT + RT arm completed pelvic RT, as defined by the protocol guidelines, and therefore,  inadequate irradiation dosage cannot explain the poorer results. Furthermore, even if we exclude the patients who experienced  treatment-related death, the survival in the BOMP group remains significantly inferior (39% v 25%).

The lung toxicity experienced by patients in the CT + RT group is unacceptable. In this study, the incidence of pulmonary  toxicity was 13% (five of 39), with four patients dying from this complication. Recently, Chambers et al also reported a high incidence of pulmonary toxicity in patients receiving BOMP CT for gynecologic  squamous cell carcinoma. These authors treated 23 patients (20 cervical cancer, two vulvar, one ovarian) and observed the  development of pulmonary toxicity in eight patients (34.5%), with five of them dying a respiratory death while free of  disease. 

