AFTER AN INITIAL WAVE of success, the treatment of advanced breast cancer has plateaued. Combination chemotherapy is capable of inducing objective responses in 60% to 70% of cases, but only 10% to 15% of these are complete responses.' When seen, response durations are relatively short, in the range of 10 to 12 months. Hormonal therapy produces responses in 25% to 30% of unselected patients, with median response durations in the same range. However, the frequency of hormonal responses can be increased significantly by selecting patients whose tumors contain specific cytosolic receptors for estrogen or progesterone or both. 

Although complete responses can be seen with both forms of therapy, there are few cures of breast cancer once metastases have been demonstrated. If it were assumed that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of their estrogen receptor (ER) content, ie, composed of ER positive (ER +) and ER negative (ER -) cells in various proportions, then they may have a differential response to endocrine and cytotoxic chemotherapy. The differential responses of ER + and ER -cells to hormonal therapy has been well documented. 7' 8 However, it is not clear that there is a differential response of ER + and ER - cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Using a monoclonal antibody specific to human breast cancer ER, King et al documented tumor heterogeneity in terms of ER content." Using a similar technique Nenci was able to demonstrate that breast tumors are rarely composed of homogeneous cell types, ie, almost all breast cancers are composed of mixed receptor-positive and receptor-negative cell populations in variable proportions. Nenci also found that positivity of 20% of the cells was sufficient to give a positive ER by cytosolic assay. The rationale for combining hormonal therapy with cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumption that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cells to hormonal and chemotherapy. It is also assumed that neither chemotherapy nor hormonal therapy will interfere with action of the other form of treatment so that the response rates for the combination will be at least additive, and not antagonistic.

With this theoretical background, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) designed protocol 8081 to determine if the addition of a hormonally active agent (tamoxifen) would enhance the response rate, response duration, and survival of women with advanced breast cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. A previous CALGB study demonstrated that the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin; Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), vincristine, and prednisone (CAFVP) or CAF were each superior to the widely used combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF). The same study also confirmed that CAF was less toxic than CAFVP. CAF was therefore selected as the chemotherapy for CALGB 8081. Tamoxifen was chosen as the hormonal agent because of its demonstrated efficacy in postmenopausal women with breast cancer and its relative lack of toxicity. 

Patients were prospectively randomized after stratification by ER content, menopausal status, dominant site of metastatic disease, and prior adjuvant chemotherapy. CALGB 8081 opened for patient entry on February 1, 1980 and closed on August 1, 1982. Preliminary data have been previously reported. This constitutes the final report.
