MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Eligibility
Eligibility requirements for this study included histologically documented carcinoma of the breast that was locally recurrent, metastatic or surgically incurable (stage III or IV); measurable disease; a CALGB performance score of 3 or less; and age < 75 years. Any radiation therapy must have been completed at least 3 weeks earlier. Patients had to have a WBC count of > 4,000/pL, platelets > 100,000/L, a blood urea nitrogen level of <20 mg/dL, serum creatinine of < 1.5 mg/dL, and normal values for SGOT and bilirubin, unless abnormal values resulted from metastatic involvement. Informed consent was required. Patients were ineligible if they did not satisfy all the above criteria or if they had a second primary neoplasm other than cured basal cell carcinoma of the skin or carcinoma in situ of the cervix. They were also excluded if they had medical or psychiatric disease that would not permit the patient to give informed consent or undergo therapy. A history of myocardial infarction within 6 months of protocol entry, congestive heart failure requiring digitalis, or angina were all causes for exclusion. Radiation therapy to 50% or more of the bony pelvis and lumbar spine or palliative radiotherapy to more than two sites of metastatic disease also rendered a patient ineligible. Patients who had received prior ajuvant chemotherapy were eligible if it had been discontinued for at least 6 months at the time of protocol entry.
Patients who relapsed while receiving adjuvant therapy or who had been previously treated with chemotherapy or tamoxifen for metastatic disease were ineligible.

Stratification and Randomization
Patients were randomized from within 13 strata based on ER status (negative, positive, or unknown), dominant site of disease (visceral or nonvisceral), prior adjuvant chemotherapy or hormonal therapy, and menopausal status (pre- or postmenopausal) as follows: the postmenopausal patients were divided into 12 strata based on the other three factors, and the premenopausal patients were a single stratum (Table 1). Randomization was accomplished by a "sealed envelope method" using a Latin square design balancing within and across institutions and stratification factors. 

The protocol recommended the use of the dextran-coated charcoal ER assay. Using the data of Hilf et al, values of > 7 fmol/mg/protein were considered positive, and <7 fmol/mg/ protein negative. 18 When no ER assay was performed, the patient was designated ER unknown. When feasible, the ER assay was performed on tissue obtained from a metastatic site at the time of protocol entry. If this were not possible, patients were stratified according to the ER determination made on the primary tumor. The ER assays were quality controlled using reference powders provided by James Witliff, PhD of the University of Louisville.

Patients were classified as having either visceral or other (osseous or soft tissue) dominant sites of disease on study entry. Visceral metastases included disease in the liver, pulmonary parenchyma or pleura, brain, or bone marrow. Osseous disease indicated metastases in bone. Soft tissue disease was defined as local recurrence in the skin or lymph nodes or inoperable (stage IV) breast cancer. When multiple sites were involved, visceral disease was dominant over others for classification purposes. Patients were considered naturally postmenopausal if at least 6 months had elapsed since the last menstrual period.

Treatment
After appropriate stratification, patients were randomized to receive either chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (Fig 1). Chemotherapy was administered in 28-day cycles--a 14-day period of drug administration followed by a 14-day rest
period. Patients received cyclophosphamide, 100 mg/m2 orally for days 1 through 14 of each cycle, plus doxorubicin, 25 mg/m2 , and 5-FU, 500 mg/m 2 intravenously (IV) on days 1 and 8 of each cycle (CAF). Patients in regimen 1 also received tamoxifen, 10 mg, twice daily continuously (TCAF). Dose calculations were based on the patient's ideal body weight or actual
weight, whichever was lower. After a total cumulative dose of 450 mg/m 2 of doxorubicin had been reached, methotrexate was substituted at a dose of 40 mg/m 2 (30 mg/m 2 for patients older than 60 years).

Dose modifications for cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-FU were based on the total WBC count and platelet count on the day of treatment. Reductions were also made for elevations of serum bilirubin and SGOT and for the occurrence of stomatitis, diarrhea, or cystitis.

Ancillary Therapy
Palliative radiation was not permitted for patients on protocol, with the exception of cranial irradiation for documented intracranial metastases. Chemotherapy was not withheld when patients required such irradiation. 

Response Criteria
A complete response (CR) required disappearance of all signs and symptoms attributable to the tumor, including the disappearance of all lesions for at least 1 month. No new lesions could appear. For bony disease, CR meant recalcification of all osteolytic lesions. A partial response (PR) indicated a > 50% reduction in the sum of the products of the two largest perpendicular diameters of all measured lesions without deterioration in performance. This had to last at least I month without the appearance of new lesions or the enlargement of existing ones. For bony metastases, a PR meant partial recalcification of osteolytic lesions without the development of new lesions. Stable disease (stable) was a reduction in tumor size of < 50% or an increase < 25% over the original measurements. For bone lesions, this meant no change. In addition, no new lesions could appear.

Progressive disease (PD) indicated the appearance of new lesions subsequently proven to be metastases. If the sum of the products of the two largest perpendicular diameters increased by 25% over that obtained at the time of maximum regression, the patient was also considered to have progressive disease. Progression of osteolytic lesions or the appearance of new osteolytic lesions on x-ray also constituted progression of disease. 

Patients were evaluated after two courses (8 weeks) of therapy. If progressive disease was evident, the patient was considered a treatment failure and taken off protocol. Responding patients and those with stable disease continued on therapy until there was evidence of tumor progression or prohibitive drug toxicity.

Statistical Methods
Differences in distributions of duration of response, time to treatment failure, and survival time were evaluated using a Cox proportional hazard multivariate model19 or, univariately, the log rank test. Differences in response frequencies and patient characteristics were evaluated using a multivariate linear logistic model, or, univariately, the chi square test.  Medians and survival curves were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. The term "statistically significant" refers to P values <.05.

RESULTS
A total of 474 patients were entered on CALGB protocol 8081 between February, 1, 1980 and August, 1, 1982 (Table 2). Originally,the protocol was open only to postmenopausal patients, but an addendum in April 1980 permitted the entry of premenopausal patients as well. Fewer than 5% (23) of the 474 patients were inevaluable: 11 were ineligible, seven were never treated on protocol, and five had incomplete data submitted, leaving 451 evaluable patients. Of the 451 evaluable cases, 46 had prior adjuvant chemotherapy (completed >6 months before protocol entry), and 26 had evaluable but nonmeasurable bone disease. The adjuvant group will be analyzed separately.

Comparability of Groups (Patient Characteristics): Measurable Disease
The treatment groups were comparable on all baseline characteristics (Table 3). Approximately three quarters of the patients on this study were postmenopausal, with a median age of 56 years. Nearly two thirds of the patients had visceral disease. Roughly one third of the patients were ER-, one third ER +, and one third ER unknown in each arm of the protocol. Seventy-seven percent of the patients on the CAF regimen and 75% of those on the TCAF regimen had a performance score of 0 or 1.

Comparability of Groups (Patient Characteristics):Nonmeasurable Disease
When compared with the 379 patients in the main analysis, the 26 patients with "bone-only" disease were more likely to have had prior radiotherapy (50% v 29%; P = .03, chi square test). They also had more pain at entry (20% pain-free v 46%; P = .013, chi square test) and were less likely to have visceral disease. 

Response 
Four patients were considered inevaluable for the response analysis due to error, inadequate records, or hip fracture. Among 375 patients, CRs were seen in 47 (25%) of patients treated with TCAF and 34 (18%) of patients treated with CAF (Table 4). This difference was not statistically significant (P = .08). PRs were seen in 71 (38%) TCAF patients and 71 (37%) patients on CAF. The difference between the total (CR and PR) response rates-TCAF, 64% v CAF, 55%-was also not statistically significant (P = .09).

The best response by selected patient characteristics is shown in Table 5. Univariately, there were no significant differences in response rates according to menopausal status or ER status. Patients with soft tissue disease had a higher response rate than those with visceral or osseous disease (P = .05), and patients with better performance status at entry had a higher response
rate (P = .02). 

Among postmenopausal patients, the response rates between TCAF (62%) and CAF (53%) were not significantly different (P = .12), nor was there a significant difference in response among ER + patients to TCAF (67%) v CAF (56%); P = .22. However, among patients with soft tissue disease, TCAF produced a higher response rate than CAF (88%, 58%; P = .009). In a multivariate
logistic model, only performance status was shown to be a significant prognostic factor for response. When treatment was added to the model, the P value was .15 for the significance of treatment regimen while controlling for performance status.

Response rates (CR and PR) for bone-only patients were significantly lower than for other patients (35% v 59%; P = .013, chi square test). However, more of the bone-only patients achieved stable disease or subjective improvement, and none had progression as the best response. If the difficulty of assessing response for the bone-only patients was taken into account, then bone-only patients were equally responsive to therapy (Table 6).

Time to treatment failure (TTF), survival, and duration of response were significantly longer for bone-only patients (Figs 2 and 3). No differences were found between the CAF and TCAF regimens, although the sample size was very small.

Duration of Response, Time to Treatment Failure, Survival
Duration of response was defined as the time from response to relapse, death, or the date the patient was last seen (if the patient was still responding). Similarly, TTF was the time from randomization to relapse, progression, or death (if the patient died without documented progression of disease) or the date last seen. Survival was measured from randomization to death or the date last seen.

The median duration of response in this study was 12.0 months (Fig 4). The duration of response did not differ significantly between the TCAF and the CAF treatment programs. The median durations of response were 12.3 (TCAF) and 11.3 (CAF) months, respectively (P = .81). Univariately, regardless of treatment (TCAF v CAF), ER positivity was significantly related to the duration of response, with ER + and ER unknown patients responding longer than ER - patients (Fig 5). Median durations of response were 16.5, 15.8, and 8.5 months, respectively, with a P value of .004. There were no significant differences in durations of response according to dominant site of metastases or menopausal status. There was no significant difference in duration of response by treatment (TCAF v CAF) in ER + patients. Thus, the addition of tamoxifen failed to increase response duration of ER + patients treated with CAF chemotherapy. Response rate and response duration of ER - patients treated with CAF or TCAF were not significantly different, ie, there was no detrimental effect of tamoxifen in ER - patients. 

The overall median TTF was 10.6 months. TTF did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups, with medians of 11.4 and 9.5 months; P = .25. Among ER+ patients, TTF by treatment (TCAF v CAF) did not differ significantly (P = .71). In a multivariate Cox proportional hazards model, the following significant prognostic factors relating to TTF were identified: performance status (0 better than 1,2,3: P = .02), number of disease sites (one better than two or more; P = .037), and ER status (negative worse than positive or unknown; P = .00006). In a model that controlled for these factors, the P value for the comparison of treatment groups was .56.

The overall median survival was 19.6 months (Fig 6). Survival distributions did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups (medians, 20.6 and 19.9 months; P = .76). Two factors were prognostic for survival in a univariate analysis: dominant site of disease with visceral worse than osseous or soft tissue (medians, 18.3, 22.8, 22.0 months; P = .05), and ER status with negative worse than positive or unknown (medians, 15.8, 24.9, 23.1 months; P<.0001). There were no significant differences according to menopausal status (P = .75). Among ER + patients, the treatments did not differ significantly (P = .45).

A secondary objective of this study was to evaluate prospectively the response of ER + v ER - tumors to CAF chemotherapy. When the 190 evaluable patients receiving CAF were analyzed by ER status (Table 7), there was no significant difference in response rate between ER + and ER - tumors (56%). However, TTF, response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients (P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively) (Fig 7).

Toxicity
Toxicity data were available on 375 of 379 cases (98.9% of cases entered) and are displayed in Table 8. There were three early deaths and one patient had treatment withheld after a hip fracture. Both programs produced equivalent incidences of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, nausea and vomiting, and infection. Tamoxifen appeared to add little in the way of toxicity to CAF. There were seven toxic deaths (1.8%), four on CAF and three on TCAF. All but one of these patients died of infection while neutropenic. The other lethal toxicity was congestive heart failure.  
