In the late 1970s, adjuvant chemotherapy became a standard treatment for high-risk premenopausal patients with breast cancer. 

To test the hypothesis that adding radiation to adjuvant systemic therapy improves the outcome in patients with breast cancer, we designed a randomized trial in 1978 in British Columbia. After written informed consent was obtained, the patients were randomly assigned to one of two groups: those receiving adjuvant chemotherapy plus locoregional radiotherapy in five fields (the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group, with 164 patients) and those receiving chemotherapy alone (the chemotherapy group, with 154 patients). Among these 68 patients, 33 were assigned to chemotherapy and 35 were assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Of the 164 patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 12 did not receive radiotherapy and were treated with chemotherapy alone (7 declined radiotherapy, 3 had metastases before radiotherapy, and 2 had postsurgical complications). Eight patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy had radiotherapy at their own request or that of their physicians. During the 15 years of follow-up, breast cancer had recurred in 176 patients and 144 patients died. Of the 176 patients with recurrences, the disease returned locoregionally as a first event in 55 and systemically in 169; 14 additional patients had locoregional recurrences after a systemic recurrence. In the group treated with chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, 79 of 164 patients had recurrences — locoregional, systemic, or both — as compared with 97 of 154 patients in the group given chemotherapy alone. 94 of 154 patients in the group treated only with chemotherapy), and a 17-percentage-point improvement in systemic disease-free survival (Fig. 36 events in the group treated with chemotherapy only), for an absolute improvement of 20 percent in survival free of local disease. Among the 94 patients who had systemic relapses after chemotherapy alone, 19 were alive at the time of the 15-year analysis, as compared with 9 of the 75 patients with such relapses in the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group. 


DISCUSSION 

This study of premenopausal women with breast cancer demonstrates that locoregional radiotherapy reduces the rates of locoregional and systemic relapses and the chance of dying from breast cancer. There was an important increase in the number of deaths not due to breast cancer among the irradiated patients (P 0.002). The patients in that study were similar to those in our cohort; there was a large and homogeneous group of premenopausal, node-positive patients treated with chemotherapy and five-field radiotherapy. The Stockholm trial also provides evidence that locoregional radiotherapy in node-positive patients decreases the risk of systemic metastases. In this context, the interaction with adjuvant chemotherapy may be important, because chemotherapy is expected to eliminate systemic micrometastases more effectively than locoregional disease. 


Because all our patients were uniformly treated with chest-wall and nodal radiation, our results may not apply to patients treated with breast irradiation alone after conservative surgery. Four randomized trials comparing breast irradiation with no irradiation in patients who underwent conservative surgery showed significant reductions in the rate of relapse in the breast but no effect on systemic recurrences or overall survival. Therefore, it may be necessary to add nodal radiation to breast irradiation in premenopausal node-positive patients who are treated with partial mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy. Locoregional radiation is not routinely used at 

present in patients with node-positive breast cancer, although it is coming into use to treat patients with 10 or more positive nodes and occasionally those with 4 or more positive nodes. The routine use of radiation in all node-positive patients would represent 

a substantial shift in treatment for breast cancer. The elimination of locoregional cancer cells by radiotherapy added to adjuvant chemotherapy may reduce mortality in selected patients with breast cancer.
