TRIALS of postoperative radiotherapy for breast cancer conducted during the 1960s and 1970s showed significant reductions in rates of locoregional recurrence but no improvement in overall survival. 

This result has been attributed to micrometastases, which determine prognosis regardless of the effect of the locoregional therapy. 

Additional concern was raised by data suggesting that irradiated patients have reduced survival rates, due to either immune suppression or cardiac complications. 

In the late 1970s, adjuvant chemotherapy became a standard treatment for high-risk premenopausal patients with breast cancer.

The use of adjuvant radiation subsequently declined, because it did not appear to prolong survival. 

Nevertheless, there are reasons to reconsider radiotherapy, including the limited value of adjuvant chemotherapy for bulky disease, a synergistic effect of chemotherapy plus radiation on residual locoregional tumor, and the possibility that eliminating bulky disease with radiation may improve the effect of chemotherapy, because chemotherapy may be more effective when the overall disease burden is low.

To test the hypothesis that adding radiation to adjuvant systemic therapy improves the outcome in patients with breast cancer, we designed a randomized trial in 1978 in British Columbia. 

This report presents our findings after 15 years of follow-up.

METHODS.

From 1979 through 1986, 318 premenopausal women with newly diagnosed stage I or II breast cancer were enrolled in the study after undergoing modified radical mastectomy if, after axillary-node dissection, one or more level I or II lymph nodes were found to be positive on pathological examination. 

The mastectomy was performed according to standard surgical practice between 1979 and 1986. 

After written informed consent was obtained, the patients were randomly assigned to one of two groups, those receiving adjuvant chemotherapy plus locoregional radiotherapy in five fields (the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group, with 164 patients) and those receiving chemotherapy alone (the chemotherapy group, with 154 patients). 

The characteristics of the patients were evenly balanced, as Table 1 shows.

Surgery.

All the patients underwent modified radical mastectomy, with dissection of level I and II axillary lymph nodes. 

The surgery was performed by specialists who referred all the patients to the British Columbia Cancer Agency, the provincial cancer institute, for registration, randomization, and the planning of the chemotherapy and radiation treatments.

Chemotherapy.

The chemotherapy consisted of cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter of body-surface area), methotrexate (40 mg per square meter), and fluorouracil (600 mg per square meter) (the CMF regimen), given intravenously every 21 days as described by Bonadonna et al., initially for 12 months (80 patients), and in the case of patients randomized after 1981, for 6 months.

Radiation.

The radiation therapy was administered between the fourth and fifth cycles of chemotherapy. 

Sixteen daily treatments were delivered over a period of three to four weeks. 

The postmastectomy chest wall received a dose of 37.5 Gy through two tangential fields. 

The mid-axilla received a dose of 35 Gy through an anterior supraclavicular–axillary field with a posterior axillary boost. 

A direct internal mammary field delivered a dose of 35 Gy at a depth of 3 cm. All the fields were treated with cobalt-60. 

The interval between the fourth and fifth cycles of chemotherapy was five to six weeks. 

Also, as part of a second randomization, 68 patients with estrogen-positive tumors were treated with radiationinduced ovarian ablation that included 20 Gy over a period of five days plus prednisone (7.5 mg per day) for two years, as described by Meakin et al. Among these 68 patients, 33 were assigned to chemotherapy and 35 were assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. 

Statistical Analysis.

In the various analyses, we studied the following end points, any relapse of breast cancer (or death without a known relapse of breast cancer), for the analysis of disease-free survival, locoregional recurrence as a first event, before a systemic recurrence (in the ipsilateral chest wall or an axillary, internal mammary, or supraclavicular node), for the analysis of survival free of locoregional disease, any systemic relapse, with or without a locoregional relapse (or death without a known systemic relapse), for the analysis of survival free of systemic disease, death from breast cancer, for the analysis of breast-cancer–specific survival, and any death, for the analysis of overall survival. 

Survival curves were estimated by the Kaplan–Meier method.

Significance levels, estimates of relative risk, and 95 percent confidence intervals were calculated with a proportional-hazards  regression model. 

Two-sided P values of less than 0.05 were considered to represent statistical significance. 

The analysis was donefor the whole group of 318 patients and also for subgroups with involvement in either one to three axillary nodes or four or more nodes. 

Differences between these subgroups with respect to the relative risk associated with the radiation were studied by testing for significant interactions with the proportional-hazards regression model. 

In the survival analysis, the time to the end points associated with each event was calculated from the date of the tissue diagnosis of breast cancer. 

Eleven patients (3.5 percent) were lost to follow-up — three (1.9 percent) from the chemotherapy group and eight (4.9 percent) from the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group. 

All 11  patients were alive and had no recurrences at their last known follow-up. 

In all the analyses, the data were censored as of the date of that follow-up. 

Of the 164 patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 12 did not receive radiotherapy and were treated with chemotherapy alone (7 declined radiotherapy, 3 had metastases before radiotherapy, and 2 had postsurgical complications). 

Eight patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy had radiotherapy at their own request or that of their physicians. 

All the analyses presented were performed on an intention-to-treat basis (according to the initial randomization).

RESULTS.

All Patients.

A total of 318 patients were randomized, and among the survivors the median follow-up was 150 months (150 months in the chemotherapy group and 150 in the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group). 

During the 15 years of follow-up, breast cancer had recurred in 176 patients and 144 patients died. 

Of the 176 patients with recurrences, the disease returned locoregionally as a first event in 55 and systemically in 169, 14 additional patients had locoregional recurrences after a systemic recurrence. 

There was no difference with regard to any survival end point between the patients who had 12 months of chemotherapy and those who had only 6 months P 0.60 for disease-free survival at 15 years, P 0.70 for overall survival).

Study Groups.

Table 2 and Figures 1 through 4 show the results in the two groups of patients. 

In the group treated with chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, 79 of 164 patients had recurrences — locoregional, systemic, or both — as compared with 97 of 154 patients in the group given chemotherapy alone. 

These values translate into an overall reduction of 33 percent in the rate of recurrence of breast cancer (relative risk, 0.67, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.50 to 0.90, P 0.007), with an improvement of 17 percentage points in disease-free survival at the 15-year followup (Fig. 1). 

There was an overall reduction of 34 percent in the rate of systemic recurrence (relative risk, 0.66, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.49 to 0.89, P 0.006) in the group treated with combined therapy (75 of 164 patients vs. 94 of 154 patients in the group treated only with chemotherapy), and a 17-percentage-point improvement in systemic disease-free survival (Fig. 2). 

The rate of locoregional recurrence was reduced by 56 percent (relative risk, 0.44, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.26 to 0.77, P 0.003) in the group given chemotherapy plus radiotherapy (19 events, vs. 36 events in the group treated with chemotherapy only), for an absolute improvement of 20 percent in survival free of local disease. 

Mortality from breast cancer was reduced by 29 percent in the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group (relative risk, 0.71, 95 percent confidence interval,0.51 to 0.99, P 0.05), with 62 deaths, as compared with 76 in the chemotherapy-only group, which represented an improvement of 10 percentage points in breast-cancer–specific survival (Fig. 3). 

There were 66 deaths in the group given the combined treatment and 78 deaths in the chemotherapy group, for a 26 percent reduction in overall mortality at 15 years (relative risk, 0.74, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.53 to 1.02, P 0.07) and an 8 percent improvement in overall survival (Table 2 and Fig. 4). 

Among the 94 patients who had systemic relapses after chemotherapy alone, 19 were alive at the time of the 15-year analysis, as compared with 9 of the 75 patients with such relapses in the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group. 

Radiation also improved outcome in the 68 patients randomly assigned to ovarian ablation, in regard to disease-free survival (relative risk, 0.72), survival free of systemic disease (relative risk, 0.76), and overall survival (relative risk, 0.88).

Subgroups Based on Nodal Involvement.

The reduction in the relative risk of a recurrence that was obtained by adding radiation to chemotherapy was similar in the subgroup with one to three positive nodes and the subgroup with four or more positive nodes (Table 3). 

There were no statistically significant differences between these subgroups with regard to either survival free of systemic disease (P for interaction 0.9) or rates of locoregional recurrence (P 0.73).

Side Effects of Radiation.

Arm edema developed in 15 of the 154 irradiated patients. 

Interventions were required in six (an elastic sleeve in four, a pump in one, and physiotherapy in one), as compared with five patients in the chemotherapy group, one of whom required physiotherapy. 

Limited apical lung fibrosis developed in most of the irradiated patients, but only one had interstitial pneumonitis requiring corticosteroids, with full resolution on chest radiography several weeks later. 

In one patient with a right-sided breast lesion,congestive heart failure developed 14 years after radiotherapy, at the age of 63. 

We considered this event related not to the adjuvant radiation but rather to treatment with doxorubicin, which was given at a cumulative dose of 540 mg for metastases to the lung and pleura. 

There were no cases of brachial plexopathy. 

The incidence of second cancers and the associated mortality were distributed evenly between the two groups (Table 4).

DISCUSSION.

This study of premenopausal women with breast cancer demonstrates that locoregional radiotherapy reduces the rates of locoregional and systemic relapses and the chance of dying from breast cancer. 

There was no excess mortality we could attribute to the long-term side effects of radiotherapy. 

Our trial did not stratify the patients according to nodal status, but a test for interaction showed no significant difference in the magnitude of the benefit from radiotherapy between the subgroup with three or fewer positive nodes and the subgroup with four or more positive nodes. 

These data based on a 15-year follow-up indicate that radiation can offer substantialprotection from systemic relapse to node-positive patients. 

It is possible that we will see additional benefit in overall survival, because at this writing 19 patients in the chemotherapy group remain alive with systemic recurrence, as compared with only 9 in the combined-treatment group, most of these 28 patients are expected to die of breast cancer. 

The benefits of radiotherapy found in our study, but not in most earlier studies, merit comment. 

The meta-analysis performed by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group,1 which analyzed all the randomized radiation trials begun before 1985, found a 67 percent reduction in rates of locoregional relapse (P 0.001) and a 6 percent reduction in mortality from breast cancer (P 0.03), but no improvement in overall survival. 

There was an important increase in the number of deaths not due to breast cancer among the irradiated patients (P 0.002). 

A previous meta-analysis and several individual trials found that the latter was due to a substantial increase in mortality from cardiac causes. 

These studies, however, included all the radiation trials started in the 1960s, using older equipment and radiation techniques and considered obsolete by present standards. 

Also, in various past trials different areas were encompassed in the irradiated volume, and the trials differed in techniques of radiation, treatment planning, age, nodal status, and the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. 

Therefore, the metaanalyses of previous studies may not be relevant to current practice.

There are at least nine reported randomized trials comparing the combined treatment with chemotherapy alone. 

Of these, only the Danish study found that radiotherapy had a benefit of a magnitude similar to that in our trial, and there was a significant survival benefit in favor of radiotherapy (P 0.001). 

The patients in that study were similar to those in our cohort, there was a large and homogeneous group of premenopausal, node-positive patients treated with chemotherapy and five-field radiotherapy. 

The other eight studies were notsimilar to ours or the Danish trial, either because the number of randomized premenopausal patients was small or because the radiotherapy techniques or the chemotherapy schedules were heterogeneous. 

Our data suggest that locoregional disease is not only a marker of systemic disease but also, in some patients, a potential source for its future dissemination. 

The Stockholm trial also provides evidence that locoregional radiotherapy in node-positive patients decreases the risk of systemic metastases. 

In this context, the interaction with adjuvant chemotherapy may be important, because chemotherapy is expected to eliminate systemic micrometastases more effectively than locoregional disease. 

In node-positive patients, adding locoregional radiotherapy may be essential to prevent secondary dissemination from the residual locoregional metastatic disease, and it could increase the potential for cure.

Because all our patients were uniformly treated with chest-wall and nodal radiation, our results may not apply to patients treated with breast irradiation alone after conservative surgery. 

Four randomized trials comparing breast irradiation with no irradiation in patients who underwent conservative surgery showed significant reductions in the rate of relapse in the breast but no effect on systemic recurrences or overall survival. 

Therefore, it may be necessary to add nodal radiation to breast irradiation in premenopausal node-positive patients who are treated with partial mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy. 

Locoregional radiation is not routinely used atpresent in patients with node-positive breast cancer, although it is coming into use to treat patients with 10 or more positive nodes and occasionally those with 4 or more positive nodes. 

The routine use of radiation in all node-positive patients would represent a substantial shift in treatment for breast cancer. 

Our data indicate that locoregional disease remaining after definitive surgery may be an important source of systemic disease. 

The elimination of locoregional cancer cells by radiotherapy added to adjuvant chemotherapy may reduce mortality in selected patients with breast cancer.

