

THE American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
define stage IB cervical cancer as invasive cancer that is confined to the cervix, with a depth of
more than 5 mm and a width of more than 7 mm. In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers,
local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers, whether treated
by surgery or irradiation. 


Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy
results in faster and more complete responses and better survival than expected with radiotherapy
alone.


Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or
adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix of stage IB (exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors with
a minimal diameter of 4 cm) were eligible for the study. 


Patients were excluded from the study if they were thought to be unable to complete the planned
course of therapy or the follow-up evaluations. 


Patients’ medical records, films, and pathology slides were reviewed by the appropriate Gynecologic
Oncology Group committees. 


The design called for a final analysis when 56 events (recurrences or deaths) had occurred in
patients receiving the control regimen (radiotherapy alone) and provided the study with a
statistical power of 80 percent with use of the log-rank test and a one-sided significance level of
0.05.


At the time of this analysis, 69 patients in the group receiving the control regimen had had a
recurrence of disease and 49 had died — 88 percent of the number of deaths needed for a final
analysis of survival. 


The Cox model was used to evaluate the difference between treatment regimens, adjust for prognostic
factors, and estimate the relative likelihood (and 95 percent confidence intervals) of survival and
progression-free survival. The first stopping rule was chosen to reject the null hypothesis at the 1
percent level, whereas the second was chosen so that the level of rejection for both interim tests
was 2 percent. 


All patients had primary cervical cancers that were at least 4 cm in diameter, and the distribution
of the tumors according to size was similar in the two groups. The median weekly dose of cisplatin
was 39.0 mg per square meter (10th and 90th percentiles, 32.3 and 40.3, respectively, range, 0 to
49.7). One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone and two patients assigned to receive
radiotherapyand cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy. The median total treatment time was 50
days in both groups (Table 2).


There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group
had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13
percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone. Grade 3 hematologic toxicity was defined as a total
white-cell count of less than 2000 per cubic millimeter, and grade 4 as a total white-cell count of
less than 1000 per cubic millimeter. 


Cox multiple regression analysis showed that the size of the tumor as assessed by physical
examination and the histologic grade of the tumor were both significant prognostic factors. 


In 1992, when the current study was initiated, complete data on survival in the earlier trial were
not available, but an early analysis showed a significantly lower rate of relapses in the pelvic
region among women who underwent hysterectomy. 


Cisplatin potentiates the sublethal damageinduced by radiation and inhibits the repair of
potentially lethal radiation-induced damage.


In addition to these three trials, two other randomized trials have also found that combining
radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy improves survival and disease-free survival. 


Of the 369 eligible patients in our study who were scheduled to undergo hysterectomy after the
completion of radiotherapy, 93 percent did undergo the surgery. 


The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that we have discussed involve different stages of
cervical cancer and combinations of treatment, but they share a common result, all five studies
found that concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy led to better outcomes than
radiotherapy alone or in combination with treatments that did not include cisplatin. 
