In addition, patients had to be medically suitable for hysterectomy. The institutions that participated in the study are listed in the Appendix. Written informed consent was obtained before entry into the study, fulfilling all institutional, state, and federal regulations.

Radiotherapy
All patients were scheduled to undergo external irradiation, intracavitarybrachytherapy, and extrafascial hysterectomy, with half the patients randomly assigned to receive weekly intravenous infusions of cisplatin during the period of radiotherapy. The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both groups. Standard Fletcher–Suit or Henschke applicators were used. The corpus and cervix were removed but not contiguous parametrial tissue. The uterine vessels were transected at the uterine wall medial to the ureters, which were not unroofed. Survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit. 

All reported P values are two-tailed. The first stopping rule was chosen to reject the null hypothesis at the 1 percent level, whereas the second was chosen so that the level of rejection for both interim tests was 2 percent. To simplify presentation, the P values were not adjusted for the results of the two interim analyses. Thus, a total of 369 patients were evaluated,186 in the radiotherapy group and 183 in the combined-therapy group. There was a slightly higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31 percent in the radiotherapy group). The median total treatment time was 50 daysin both groups (Table 2). More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. five inthe combined-therapy group), and more patients inthis group also had an early recurrence (eight vs.

Adverse Effects
There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy grouphad grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone. These reactions consisted almost exclusively of transient hematologic effects (39 and 3 patients in the respective groups)and gastrointestinal effects (26 and 9 patients) (Table3). Grade 3 hematologic toxicity was defined asa total white-cell count of less than 2000 per cubicmillimeter, and grade 4 as a total white-cell count ofless than 1000 per cubic millimeter. The frequency of grade 1 (minimal) and grade 2 (mild)genitourinary and neurologic adverse effects was higher in the combined-therapy group.

Progression-free Survival
The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table4). This difference predominantly reflects the fact that there were fewer local recurrences in the combined-therapy group (16, vs. 39 in the radiotherapy group). 

Survival
The median duration of follow-up was 36 months. Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent),as compared with 27 of the patients in the groupgiven radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table4). Adjustment for these factors had no significant effect on the differences between the groups in survival and progression-free survival.
This approach was, however,associated with considerable morbidity. This controversy stimulated an earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomyafter radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone(unpublished data). Therefore, we chose to test the value of concurrent treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followedby hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy alone followed by hysterectomy. Like others,we found that the size of the tumor was an important prognostic factor. The possibility that these drugs may have additive effects, regardless of the mechanism, when given concurrently with radiotherapy has been the subject of study. This difference appeared to be due to the lower rate of relapses in the pelvic regionin the combined-therapy group. In the earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group study that assessed the value of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy, surgery was associated with a significant reduction in the rate of relapses in the pelvic region, but the overall risk of recurrence was not significantly reduced (relative risk, 0.76, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.52 to 1.12) and there was no significant difference in survival (relative risk of death, 0.91). 
