In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers, local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers, whether treated by surgery or irradiation. Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy results in faster and more complete responses and better survival than expected with radiotherapy alone. The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both groups. 

Statistical Analysis 

We estimated that 173 patients were needed in each treatment group in order to be able to detect a 40 percent decrease in the recurrence rate in the group given radiotherapy and chemotherapy. An additional patient was also excluded because she had received radiotherapy before entry. Three of these patients had been randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy alone, and two had been assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin. Thus, a total of 369 patients were evaluated, 186 in the radiotherapy group and 183 in the combined-therapy group. 


Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13 patients (7 percent) assigned to radiotherapy alone and 14 patients (8 percent) assigned to radiotherapy and cisplatin. There was a slightly higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31 percent in the radiotherapy group). Four patients assigned to the cisplatin regimen (2 percent) received no cisplatin. One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone and two patients assigned to receive radiotherapy 

and cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy. The median total treatment time was 50 days in both groups (Table 2). 


Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent) in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin. More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. There were significantly more hysterectomy specimens without detectable cancer in the combined-therapy group than in the group given radiotherapy alone (52 percent vs. 


Adverse Effects 

There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone. 


Progression-free Survival 

The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table 4). 39 in the radiotherapy group). Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent), as compared with 27 of the patients in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table 4). The threeyear survival rates were 74 percent in the group given radiotherapy alone and 83 percent in the combined-therapy group (P=0.008 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 


This controversy stimulated an earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomy after radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone (unpublished data). Therefore, we chose to test the value of concurrent treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followed by hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy alone followed by hysterectomy. 


Weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy has been assessed in several phase 2 studies. The effect of these two drugs in combination with radiotherapy was compared with the effect of hydroxyurea and radiotherapy in a randomized phase 3 trial by the Gynecologic Oncology Group involving patients with cervical cancer of stages IIB through IVA (unpublished data). The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, whose results appear elsewhere in this issue of the Journal, compared pelvic and para-aortic radiotherapy with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with cisplatin and fluorouracil in patients with clinical stage IB through IVA cervical cancer. The Southwest Oncology Group study compared pelvic radiotherapy alone with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with fluorouracil and cisplatin in high-risk patients with involvement of lymph nodes or surgical margins who had undergone radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer stage IA2, IB, or IIA (unpublished data). Both studies found that survival was increased by the use of radiotherapy in combination with cisplatin containing chemotherapy. Of the 369 eligible patients in our study who were scheduled to undergo hysterectomy after the completion of radiotherapy, 93 percent did undergo the surgery. We believe that the value of hysterectomy in these patients is doubtful. Therefore, radiotherapy in combination with treatment with cisplatin should be adequate for patients with bulky stage IB cervical cancer. 


The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that we have discussed involve different stages of cervical cancer and combinations of treatment, but they share a common result: all five studies found that concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy led to better outcomes than radiotherapy alone or in combination with treatments that did not include cisplatin. 
