MATERIALS AND METHODS.

(1)(M)  Patients with clinical Stage IB-IIA cancer of the uterine cervix treated by
radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph
node sampling were eligible for entry into this prospective study if they
had one or more of the following risk factors, (1) metastatic disease to
pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than or equal to 4 cm
in diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 75% or greater stromal
invasion, (4) nonsquamous histology, and/or (5) occult parametrial
involvement or positive surgical margins.

(1)(M)  One arm consisted of 2 cycles of chemotherapy (given 3-4 weeks apart)
utilizing bleomycin 20 U/m2/day via continuous 24-hr infusion on Days 1-3
after an initial intravenous bolus of 20 U/m2 followed by cisplatin 75 mg/m2
by iv infusion on Day 4. 

(1)(M)  In the second arm of the study, patients were randomized to treatment with a
similar regimen of chemotherapy as described above without pelvic radiation,
following the first two cycles of cisplatin and bleomycin, the patient then
received the third and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week
intervals. 

RESULTS.

(5)(R)**Between 1987 and 1994, a total of 89 patients were entered into the trial,
45 patients were entered at MSKCC, 24 from the Mayo Clinic, and 10 each from
the Uniform Services Health undergone a radical hysterectomy, bilateral
pelvic lymphade-Center and the University of Miami. 

(5)(R)**Twenty-five patients had 3 or more high risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors; 33 of these patients had 1 risk factor.  70 years. 

(5)(R)**Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had
1 to 2 risk factors, 33 of these patients and the remaining 14 patients had
a Stage IIA cancer. 

(6)(R)**There were 12 major protocol viola-patients received only a portion of the
proscribed treatment, tions, including 7 patients who were randomized (6 to
che-one patient, randomized to chemotherapy, withdrew after chemotherapy
plus radiation therapy and 1 patient to chemother-experiencing an allergic
bleomycin reaction during the initial chemotherapy alone) and then either
refused treatment (n ?6) or were infusion of bleomycin during cycle 1. 

(6)(R)**Thus, there were 33
patients who received the combination therapy treatment plan when
intravaginal radiation therapy of chemotherapy and pelvic radiation and 39
who received was administered, and she did not receive the last 2 cycles
chemotherapy alone who could be evaluated for disease-of cisplatin (n ?1).
free and overall survival. 

(7)(R)**At a median follow up of 36 months (range 4-81 months), 19 patients have
planned dose when treatment was stopped due to a severe histologic
documentation of recurrent cervical cancer. 


(2)(R)  There has been no significant difference in disease free survival between the two treatment groups.

DISCUSSION.

(3)(D)  Among patients with 3 or more risk factors, there was also no differ-The
debate regarding the role of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free
survival or overall survival when tients at high risk for recurrence after
radical hysterectomy compared to patients with 1-2 risk factors (Fig. 3). 


(8)(D)**Toxicity was tolerable in the two treatment arms. 

(3)(D)  The risk factors did not appear to be additive, since the disease-free and
overall survival were similar when patients with 1-2 risk factors were
compared to those patients with 3 or more risk factors. 

(2)(D)**Twelve of the 19 recurrences were either local recurrences only or local
plus distant metastases, with no difference in the number of local
occurrences between the two treatment arms. 

(4)(D)  The initial statistical prediction was that in order to show a 20%
improvement in survival of one treatment over the other, 80 patients were
needed in each treatment arm. 

(4)(D)  The analysis of the data from the 89 patients entered is not able to
document that the two treatments are equivalent, but must be taken to
suggest that the likelihood of finding a significant difference between
these two treatment modalities in a full trial of 160 patients is small. 
