DOXORUBICIN (DOX), or Adriamycin(Adria Laboratories, Columbus, Ohio), isone of the most useful antineoplastic agentsavailable. Its use, however, is limited by cumulative,dose-dependent, chronic cardiotoxicity. More recently, however, subclinical cardiacinjury has been documented at considerably lower doses. Discontinuation of therapy in these patients may prevent cardiac failure, but also results incurtailment of the antineoplastic effect of DOX.

One approach to solving this problem is the development of DOX analogues that retain antineoplasticactivity but possess reduced potentialfor cardiac damage. Preclinical studies suggest that this may be possible by structural alteration of the anthracyline molecule.'1 Epirubicin (4'-epi-doxorubicin, EPI) is one such compound. It is a stereoisomer of DOX in which the hydroxylgroup at the 4' position of the aminosugar side chain is epimerized (Fig 1). Pharmacokinetic studies in tumor-bearing miceand rats" indicate that EPI is more extensivelymetabolized by liver than DOX. The two compoundshave similar pharmacokinetic behavior inhumans, although EPI is eliminated more rapidly. In two clinical phase I studies, EPI was found to have acceptable toxicity at doses of 85 to 90mg/m2 given intravenously (IV) every three weeks. 

We used multigated radionuclidecineangiocardiography (RNCA) to assess cardiactoxicity in this prospective, randomized study comparing the efficacy, acute, and chronic toxicitiesof EPI with DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Eligibility
This study was conducted in patients with advanced breastcancer who had progressed after receiving combination chemotherapy.
Areas of increased uptake on bonescan were further studied with roentgenograms to determine thenature of the abnormalities. 
13) Liver scans were done only if therewas elevation of the hepatic enzymes on the biochemical profile. Blood counts were initially monitored weekly, and then lessfrequently after the pattern of myelosuppression was established. Allevaluable or measurable parameters of disease were reevaluatedat least every six weeks.Randomization was performed using the method of random permuted blocks, which assured an equal number of patientsin each arm at specified time points. It was anticipated that these doses would produce equivalent degrees of myelosuppression. Doses were adjusted based on the degree of myelosuppression observed using a predetermined schedule. Neither patients nor physicians were blinded with respect to treatment. Any patient who developed progressive disease within three months of startingtherapy was considered to have progressed even if she had demonstrated transient tumor regression. 

Evaluation of Toxicity
The percent of projected dose received was calculated for each patient as the average of all doses the patient received(mg/m 2) - 85 if the patient was randomized to EPI and - 60 if the patient was randomized to DOX. Cardiac toxicity was assessed in all patients by both clinicalevaluation and RNCA. RNCA was done with thepatients in supine position at rest and during maximum symptom limited bicycle exercise.  Patients' RBCs were labeled invivo by injecting 10 to 20 mCi of technetium 99m IV 30 minutesafter stannous pyrophosphate injection. Images of the left ventricle were recorded by positioning the camera in the left anterioroblique position, using a computer-based procedure gated to the electrocardiogram. In our laboratory, during the period of time that this study was conducted, the reproducibilityof LVEF determination by RNCA was + 5%. Although all patients had received prior chemotherapywhich included cyclophosphamide orother alkylating agent, no patient had been previously treated with mitomycin C. Doses were reduced more frequently on the DOX arm ascompared to the EPI arm, in which two patients'doses were escalated. The median actual doseadministered was 100% of the projected dose ofEPI and 86% of the planned dose of DOX (Wilcoxontest, P = .01).

Response Rates and Durations
Twenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28patients on the DOX arm are evaluable for therapeuticresponse (Table 2). 
31) Six (25%) of the 24 evaluable patientstreated with EPI and seven (25%) of the 28 evaluablepatients on the DOX arm achieved PRs. In addition, on the EPI arm, one patient experienced an MR and eight patients had stable disease. Although the major responserates did not differ between the two arms (chisquaretest, P = .98), the difference in durationof response is of borderline significance (logranktest, P = .11).  Of the 13 patients with PRs, six had tumors that were estrogen receptorpositive, six had estrogen receptor negativetumors, and in one patient the estrogen receptor value was unknown. The median WBC nadir was 2.0x 103/gL (range, 0.1 to 8.6) and the medianplatelet nadir was 132 x 103//pL (range, 20.0 to279.0) in patients receiving EPI, the median WBC nadir was 1.8 x 10'/3tL (range, 0.3 to 6.9)and median platelet nadir was 130 x 103/pL(range 24.0 to 253.0) in patients on the DOXarm. Other common toxicities included nausea,vomiting, and alopecia. 

Of the 15 evaluable patients treated with EPI, six had received prior radiotherapy to the chest wall,internal mammary lymph nodes, sternum, orthoracic spine prior to entry on this study, and two had a history of well-controlled mild hypertension. A decrease in LVEF of > 5% with stress wasnot observed in the absence of a > 10% decreasein resting LVEF from baseline. 
Nor did all patients experience asteady progressive decline in LVEF, most maintaineda stable LVEF until there was an acutedecrease. One of the patients who developed CHF on the DOX arm is the patient who had theinitial resting LVEF of 48%, this patient also hada history of pulmonary emboli and it was unclear whether this contributed to her cardiac decompensation.
Six of 11 patients who received morethan 450 mg/m 2 of DOX did not develop signs orsymptoms of CHF.  Although empiric dose restrictionis widely practiced, many patients experience the onset of CHF before they receive 550 mg/m2 ofthe drug. In nonrandomizedtrials, the use of a weekly DOX schedule hasbeen reported to permit administration of a highertotal dose of the drug. 

Although the data are suggestive, it remains unproventhat the antitumor activity of DOX is fullypreserved when these schedules are used. The therapeutic index of an agent is defined by the relationship between the dosage required toproduce therapeutic and toxic effects and by the magnitude of the favorable or unfavorable effectsobserved. The other studies, which did use dose limits,provided data that could confirm the reliability ofthe survival analysis method we have used to assess the dose effect relationships with regard to RNCA changes. Although the numbers aresmall, in the Milan study three of five patientstreated with DOX in whom RNCA was performed showed a decrease in LVEF of more than10% (375, 450, and 525 mg/m2). 
In the multidrugstudy, therapy was discontinued in seven patients on the DOX-containing (FAC) arm becauseof cardiac dysfunction, including three with heart failure. Thus, while assessment of LVEF byRNCA was useful in quantitating changes in cardiacfunction for the purposes of this study, it cannot be recommended for routine monitoring of individual patients as a predictor of impending cardiac failure. These findings, which are supported by the independent work of several other investigators,provide encouragement for further clinicaltrials with EPI. This patient had shown a decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction and was included in the analysis of laboratory cardiac toxicity.
