

Using methods of survival analysis, the median doses to the development of laboratory cardiotoxicity
were estimated to be 935 mg/m2 of epirubicin and 468 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. Fewer episodes of nausea
and vomiting were observed in patients receiving epirubicin. 


In retrospective studies, the incidence of symptomatic congestive heart failure (CHF) was estimated
to be approximately 3% to 4% after a cumulative DOX dose of 450 mg/m2 and 6% to 10% after 550 mg/m2,
the incidence of CHF rises steeply after higher cumulative doses.On the basis of these retrospective
studies, an empiric dose limitation of 450 to 550 mg/m2 has been recommended when DOX is used on a
standard every three week schedule.


One approach to solving this problem is the development of DOX analogues that retain antineoplastic
activity but possess reduced potential for cardiac damage. The antitumor activity of EPI in animal
models is similar to that of DOX, but EPI is a less toxic compound with regard to both cytotoxicity
and cardiac injury. In the mouse, EPI and DOX have similar patterns of distribution to various
tissues, although drug levels are lower in heart and spleen with EPI.  


Patients whose prior treatment included an anthracycline were excluded from this study. Other
criteria for eligibility included a performance status of - 50% (Karnofsky scale), a WBC count -
4,000/14L, a platelet count >- 100,000/L, normal serum bilirubin levels ( < 1.5 mg/dL), and
objectively evaluable or measurable disease. 


Pretreatment Evaluation and Follow-up Studies Pretreatment evaluation of patients included complete
history and physical examination, complete blood cell count (CBC), 12-channel biochemical profile,
serum creatinine, chest roentgenogram, ECG, and bone scan. 


Patients were stratified for performance status (Karnofsky scale < 70% v > 80%) and for estrogen
receptor status of the primary or a metastatic lesion (positive or unknown v negative). 


Both EPI and DOX were administered by slow (five minute) injections through an established IV line
every three weeks. 


Evaluation of ResponseThe criteria for evaluation of therapeutic response were based on the
recommendations of the Breast Cancer Task Force of the National Cancer Institute (Bethesda, Md).17
These guidelines were modified to include a minor response (MR) category for those patients with
unequivocal therapeutic responses, but less than that required for a partial response (PR). Any
patient who developed progressive disease within three months of starting therapy was considered to
have progressed even if she had demonstrated transient tumor regression. 


Exercise was continued until the patient achieved the maximum predicted heart rate or until limited
by fatigue, severe dyspnea, or chest pain. 


Eight patients on the EPI arm and 14 on the DOX arm had received prior radiotherapy to the chest,
mediastinum, or thoracic spine that may have exposed the myocardium to ionizing radiation. In
addition, four patients who received EPI and six who received DOX had a history of wellcontrolled
systemic arterial hypertension. Although all patients had received prior chemotherapy which included
cyclophosphamide or other alkylating agent, no patient had been previously treated with mitomycin C.


Response Rates and DurationsTwenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28 patients on the DOX arm are
evaluable for therapeutic response (Table 2). 


There was no difference (log rank test, P = .90) in the median time to progression between the
patients on the EPI arm (3.9 months) and those on the DOX arm (5.1 months).


Because all patients had been treated previously with chemotherapy, the degree and incidence of
alopecia is difficult to assess, however, hair loss was noted in 50% of patients treated with EPI
and 35% of those treated with DOX. 


Nor did all patients experience a steady progressive decline in LVEF, most maintained a stable LVEF
until there was an acute decrease. 


Of the patients who developed symptomatic CHF on the EPI arm, one had prior radiotherapy and one had
hypertension. 


Thirteen percent of patients in another recent study developed CHF at a median dose of 405 mg/m 2
when DOX was given on an every three week schedule. 22 With optimal monitoring, one might be able to
detect subclinical cardiac injury and prevent CHF by stopping the drug, this implies, however, the
interruption of effective antineoplastic therapy. 


Two recent studies that used endomyocardial biopsy have demonstrated that a larger total cumulative
dose of DOX can be tolerated if the drug is given weekly or by continuous intravenous infusion.  
Structurally, EPI differsvery slightly from DOX and has the same molecular weight, yet EPI and DOX
have different therapeutic, myelosuppressive, and  cardiotoxic potencies in animal systems. 


Although endomyocardial biopsy is probably the definitive measure of cardiac injury, RNCA has the
advantage of being noninvasive and, therefore, acceptable to virtually all patients in a randomized
study of antineoplastic agents. The observed major therapeutic response rate to EPI (25%) was
identical to that observed with DOX (25%). 


Although these results could have been affected by the greater incidence of cardiac irradiation
inpatients treated with DOX, only three patients who had received such radiotherapy actually
developed CHF, one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm.


In the murine tumor model systems, equal doses of EPI and DOX produce equal therapeutic effects with
less host toxicity in the EPI-treated mice, but a clinical assessment can only be based on studies
in humans. Brambilla and coworkers in Milan33 studied equal doses (75 mg/m2) of both drugs every
three weeks, they limited the total cumulative dose of each drug to 600 mg/m2. 


Most patients in our trials received less than 550 mg/m2 of EPI, however, in 11 patients receiving
cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1,465 mg/m2, RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients
at 970, 1,180,1,190, and 1,465 mg/m2, respectively (C.W. 


In this study, worsening cardiac function forced the premature discontinuation of DOX therapy in
three patients experiencing partial responses, whereas effective treatment with EPI was never
discontinued because of cardiac toxicity. 
