

The concurrent use of radiation and chemotherapy, either as a single agent or in combination, has
also been demonstrated to be effective in the local control of advanced carcinoma of the cervix with
acceptable toxicity as presented by several reports, and was also supported by our previous phase I
and II trial. Thus, we designed the randomized trial to compare the tumor response and survival rate
of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma receiving concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy
versus patients receiving radiotherapy alone. The purpose of this randomized trial was to assess
whether the chemoradiation is better than radiotherapy alone for locally advanced cervical
carcinoma. 


MATERIALS AND METHODS.


Other eligibility criteria consisted of a pathologically verified squamous cell carcinoma of the
cervix, a Karnofsky performance status index of 80% or above, and an age of younger than 70 years. 
Extraperitoneal staging laparotomy was performed if aspiration cytology was negative. 


External beam irradiation was started on Day 1 and delivered using a linear accelerator of 10-MV
photons to the whole pelvis using a four-field box technique. In the concurrent chemoradiotherapy
group, chemotherapeutic regimens consisted of cisplatin (50 mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously at
the rate of 1 mg/min on Day 1), vincristine (1 mg/m2 intravenously push on Day 2), and bleomycin (25
mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously infusion in divided doses on Days 2, 3, and 4) which were
given starting on Day 1 of radiotherapy and then every 3 weeks for a total of four courses. Flexible
granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 2 mg/kg/day administration was used to prevent
neutropenia and further infection. 


The primary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to tumor response,
failure patterns, disease-free interval, and actuarial survival. 


At a two-sided P value of 0.05, with the use of a Pearson x2 approximation, the estimated power was
80% an improvement of 25% in survival with the concurrent therapy at the a Å 0.05 level (two-sided
test). The actuarial disease-free survival and overall survival of patients with complete follow-up
were estimated by the life-table method of Kaplan and Meier. 


The median follow-up was 46.8 months (range, 12 ­ 69 months). 


An analysis of the patterns of failure reveals that the incidence of pelvic failure was equally
distributed between the treatment groups (31.7% versus 30.6%, P Å 0.93). 


Analysis by Kaplan ­ Meier method showed that the actuarial survival was not statistically different
between the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups (mean survival time, 38.1 months versus 41.5
months, P Å 0.27).


Treatment results using radiation alone in women with locally advanced cervical cancer are
unsatisfactory. These failures may be attributed to large central tumor volumes, parametrial
extensions of disease resistant to local therapies, or metastatic disease outside the radiation
field. Radiation effects are dependent on well-oxygenated tumor cells. Therefore, in an attempt to
improve tumor control and survival in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, the treatment
efficacy and tolerability of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy using cisplatin-based
chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer needs to be explored. Only
a randomized trial, using a single agent of weekly cisplatin in combination with radiotherapy, has
shown a significant improvement in local ­ regional control when compared with radiation alone. To
further increase the systemic activity and the radiation-enhancing potential of the chemotherapy, we
chose cisplatin-based regimens with vincristine and bleomycin in this trial because it had proven
high efficacy of local control in our previous phase I and II trials for patients with advanced
cervical carcinoma. Our results indicated that, despite the excellent early tumor response seen
during treatment, the benefit of concurrent chemoradiation in terms of reduced mortality and
increased pelvic control rates may not be as great as that suggested by other reports. The most
likely explanation for the poor results in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group is the higher
treatmentrelated toxicity, and that could limit the dose of definitive radiation employed or
interrupt the planned radiotherapy. The accelerated repopulation in the treatment may involve only a
small number of surviving cells, which could be omitted by posttreatment investigations. 
