ALTHOUGH much progress has been made in the early detection and control of carcinoma of the cervix since the introduction of  the Papanicolau test, it is estimated that about 13,500 new cases of invasive cervical cancer will be diagnosed in 1990 in  the United States with 6,000 patients dying from the disease. Vogl et al and Alberts et al using a combination of bleomycin, vincristine,  mitomycin, and cisplatin (BOMP) in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent disease reported high response rates (> 20% of  the patients with a complete response [CR]) with acceptable toxicity. To test this  hypothesis, we began in 1984 at the Instituto Nacional de Cancer (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) a prospective randomized trial  comparing neoadjuvant BOMP CT followed by pelvic RT (CT + RT) versus pelvic RT alone in patients with stage IIIB carcinoma of  the cervix.  Fifty-two patients were randomized to the CT + RT arm and 55 to the RT arm. In  the CT + RT group, 11 refused further therapy, including pelvic RT, after only one cycle of CT, and two others were found to  have abnormal renal function after randomization and before commencement of treatment. Thus, there were 39 assessable patients in the CT + RT  arm and 52 in the RT arm.   Six months after activation of the study, after nine patients had been treated with CT, the bleomycin dose was reduced to 15  U IM every 12 hours from day 1 to day 3 (total dose, 90 U), and after the first year, cisplatin administration was changed  from day 1 to day 4. Only supportive palliative treatment was given to relapsing patients, and CT was  not used as a salvage treatment for the patients in the RT-only arm. Seven patients were not included in response assessment in the combined modality group: four patients who died  of CT complications, two who died of metastatic disease, all of them before commencement of RT, and one other patient whose pelvic disease progressed during CT and who received palliative irradiation only because of poor general condition. These numbers are similar to those patients who were felt to have  obtained a CR: only 59% (10 of 17) and 40% (six of 15) are still alive in the RT and CT + RT groups, respectively.  As of December 1989, 31 of the 52 patients in the RT group and 30 of 39 in the CT + RT had died. It was 39% and 23% for patients randomized to RT and CT + RT, respectively (P  = .02 by the log-rank test). The cisplatin treatment day was then changed from day 1 to  day 4 but yet another patient developed the same problem (one of 12 treated patients). A more detailed  description of the pulmonary toxicity has been the subject of another report.' Diarrhea was the main complication of pelvic  irradiation, seen in eight patients (15.5%) on RT and 11 (34%) on CT + RT. Except for two patients, all others had received previous treatment (CT in two, pelvic RT in 11, and major  surgery in three).  The rationale for the use of neoadjuvant CT23 is that (1) the blood supply to the tumor is not compromised by previous  radiotherapy or surgery allowing for better drug distribution into the tumor, (2) patients' tolerance to CT may be enhanced  as performance status and marrow reserve are unaltered by previous treatment, (3) decreasing the bulkiness of the primary  disease would improve the effectiveness of the local RT, (4) there is the possibility of eradication of subclinical  metastases, and (5) theoretically a tumor may be more chemosensitive before surgery or RT.   Although 25.5% of the patients achieved a CR following three cycles of BOMP and 47% of the CT + RT group obtained a CR at the  end of RT, the 5-year overall survival was significantly inferior in the CT + RT group than in the control arm (39% v 21%, P  = .02). It cannot be accounted for by patient  selection as both groups were well balanced for the wellknown prognostic factors in stage III carcinoma of the cervix.4'24-27  More importantly, all patients in the CT + RT arm completed pelvic RT, as defined by the protocol guidelines, and therefore,  inadequate irradiation dosage cannot explain the poorer results. These authors treated 23 patients (20 cervical cancer, two vulvar, one ovarian) and observed the  development of pulmonary toxicity in eight patients (34.5%), with five of them dying a respiratory death while free of  disease.
