For premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer, the classic treatment is ovariectomy. A recent randomized study of 138 premenopausal patients with estrogen receptor-positive and progesterone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer showed that treatment with the LHRH agonist goserelin resulted in failure-free survival and overall survival similar to those observed after ovariectomy. Based on eight phase II and two phase III clinical studies involving a total of 348 premenopausal patients treated with tamoxifen, an objective response was observed in 103 patients (30%). Combined treatment with LHRH analogues and other endocrine agents, such as tamoxifen, therefore, is of great interest. To our knowledge, this study is the only three-arm, randomized study to investigate these treatments for metastatic breast cancer in premenopausal women. 

PATIENTS AND METHODS 

Patients and Treatment 

During the period from 1988 through 1995, a total of 161 patients were recruited by 17 centers from nine countries. The patients were premenopausal and had metastatic or locally advanced breast cancer. 


The following patients were excluded from the study: those with tumors that were both estrogen receptor negative and progesterone receptor negative, those with a poor performance status (World Health Organization [WHO] status of >3), those with rapidly progressing life-threatening disease (including extensive liver metastases, carcinomatous lymphangitic disease of the lungs, or central 

nervous system metastases), those with increased concentrations of plasma bilirubin (>30 mmol/L) or creatinine (>150 mmol/L), those with other concurrent or past malignancies (with the exception of adequately treated basal or squamous cell cancer of the skin and in situ carcinoma of the cervix), and those who were pregnant. Patients with previous systemic endocrine or chemotherapeutic treatment for advanced disease were not eligible. Survival curves for the three treatment groups were estimated by the Kaplan–Meier technique (35). All patients who could be evaluated for response were used. Nine patients were ineligible and were not evaluated, and seven additional eligible patients could not be evaluated. Thus, data from 145 patients could be evaluated for response (Table 1). In total, 149 patients showed disease progression and 122 (76%) of the 

161 patients died, all of breast cancer. The patient and tumor characteristics were well balanced over the three treatment groups (Table 2). 


Compared with patients in the combined-treatment arm, patients treated with buserelin alone or tamoxifen alone had a lower chance of having an objective response (complete remission and partial remission; odds ratios of 0.56 and 0.42, respectively). In contrast, the response rates in patients treated with buserelin alone and in patients treated with tamoxifen alone were much more similar (P 4 .52). 


The three treatment arms differed statistically significantly from each other with regard to progression-free survival (Table 3), with the median times to disease progression being 9.7 months for patients in the combined-treatment group, 6.3 months for patients treated with buserelin alone, and 5.6 months for patients treated with tamoxifen alone (P 4 .03; overall logrank test) (Fig. Progression free survival values for patients treated with buserelin alone and for patients treated with tamoxifen alone were very similar (P4.71). Thirty-five (66%) of the 53 patients in the combined treatment group died, 43 (80%) of the 54 patients in the group treated with buserelin alone died, and 44 (81%) of the 54 patients in the group treated with tamoxifen alone died. Overall survival values in the groups treated with buserelin alone and tamoxifen alone were again similar (P 4 .33). The median overall survival was longer in patients after combined treatment (3.7 years) than in patients after treatment with buserelin alone (2.5 years) or tamoxifen alone (2.9 years) (P 4 .01) (Table 3). The death hazard ratios for patients treated with buserelin alone or tamoxifen alone were 1.95 (95% CI 4 1.23–3.10) and 1.63 (95% CI 4 1.03–2.59), respectively, when compared with patients receiving the combined treatment. For survival after disease progression, there was a borderline statistically significant difference among the three treatment arms (P 4 .06), with the median time to death from disease progression being 29 months for patients in the combined-treatment group, 18.3 months for patientstreated with buserelin alone, and 27.1 months for patients treated with tamoxifen alone (Fig. Compared with patients receiving combined treatment, patients treated with buserelin alone or tamoxifen alone showed hazard ratios of 1.7–1.45 for survival after disease progression. Survival values for the group treated with buserelin alone and for the group treated with tamoxifen alone were very similar (P 4 .41). The objective response rate was 59% for patients with soft-tissue disease, 27% for patients with bone metastases, and 39% for patients with visceral metastases. Because of missing data and the decreasing number of patients without progressive disease, the number of patients evaluated decreased during follow-up (Table 4). In the two groups of patients treated with buserelin alone or buserelin with tamoxifen, both the median and the mean levels of plasma estradiol dropped to normal postmenopausal values within 6 weeks and remained suppressed throughout treatment in all patients (Table 4 and Fig. In the same patients, this increase fluctuated widely during treatment but persisted for years throughout treatment with values of 1000 pg/mL or more (Table 4). Hot flashes occurred less frequently (P<.001) during treatment with tamoxifen alone (17 of 43 patients; 40%) than during treatment with buserelin alone (38 of 43 patients; 88%) or during the combination treatment (41 of 47 patients; 87%). Amenorrhea also developed less often (P<.001) during treatment with tamoxifen (nine of 38 patients; 24%) than during treatment with buserelin alone (39 of 40 patients; 98%) or combined treatment (44 of 44 patients; 100%). Nausea was reported by five patients (three with WHO grade 1 and two with WHO grade 2; 12%) treated with tamoxifen alone, one patient (grade 1) receiving combined treatment, and no patients treated with buserelin alone. Overall, only two (1.2%) of 161 patients, both (i.e., two [3.7%] of 54) treated with tamoxifen alone, stopped treatment because of side effects (severe hot flashes). Phase II studies of medical treatment with tamoxifen (5) or LHRH agonists showed response rates that were similar to those observed after 

surgical castration. Those studies showed that medical treatment and surgical ablation are equally effective. From an endocrine point of view, treatment with tamoxifen and buserelin resulted in important differences. Patients treated with tamoxifen alone had levels of plasma estradiol that were threefold to fourfold higher than pretreatment values, and the elevated levels persisted for several years. In contrast, patients treated with buserelin alone had postmenopausal levels of estradiol. Plasma estradiol levels induced by treatment with buserelin alone were similar to those reported for (shortterm) treatment with goserelin [i.e., mean values of 20–23 pg/mL]. In our trial, progression-free survival (P 4 .03) and overall survival (P 4 .01) in the group receiving combined treatment were statistically significantly superior to those in the groups receiving single-drug treatment (Figs. 


A small Italian study of 85 patients that had a two by-two factorial study design and 18–24 patients per treatmentgroup demonstrated a higher response rate in patients treated with goserelin plus tamoxifen (45%) than in patients treated with goserelin alone (27%). A second, larger international study of 318 patients showed, in concordance with our study, a statistically significantly improved progression-free survival after combined treatment compared with that after a single treatment with goserelin (P 4 .03) but no statistically significant improvement in the survival or objective response rate (38% versus 31%). However, patients with estrogen receptor-negative tumors or an unknown estrogen receptor status,irrespective of the length of the disease-free interval, were also included in this study, which “diluted” the patient population with patients who had hormone-resistant breast cancer. The overall survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer is commonly comparable for combined endocrine treatment and sequential treatment. The highly heterogeneous conditions of individual patients during the course of metastatic disease require various treatment approaches. Thus, our unexpected observation that patients receiving the combined first-lineendocrine treatment tended to survive longer after disease progression (Fig. 


In conclusion, our unique three-arm, randomized study clearly showed that combined treatment with an LHRH agonist plus tamoxifen is superior to treatment with each drug alone, with respect to response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival among premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer. 
