

Many steroid and peptide hormones, growth factors, and other trophic substances are involved in the 
growth regulation of breast cancer. Deprivation or antagonism  of estradiol, a growth-stimulating
hormone for estrogen-dependent breast cancers, is especially  important. After DeSombre et al.
showed that a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone  (LHRH) analogue could induce tumor regression
in an experimental tumor model system, the results of  the first clinical study with an LHRH
analogue were reported by Klijn and de Jong. The application of depot formulations (long-acting
subcutaneous or intramuscular  implants) of various LHRH agonists caused long-term suppression of
ovarian estrogen secretion  (14,16–18). A recent randomized study of 138 premenopausal patients with
estrogen receptor-positive  and progesterone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer showed that
treatment with the LHRH  agonist goserelin resulted in failure-free survival and overall survival
similar to those observed after ovariectomy.


Tamoxifen is now the standard first-line therapy for postmenopausal metastatic breast cancer and is 
also accepted as an alternative to ovariectomy in premenopausal patients. However, the group of 
premenopausal women treated with tamoxifen had very high levels of plasma estradiol, sometimes for 
many years, because of the tamoxifen-induced stimulation of pituitary–ovarian functions. 
Furthermore, only  two relatively small studies have compared the effectiveness of surgical
castration with that of  tamoxifen and showed no major differences in results. 


To test the hypothesis further, we designed a three-arm study to assess the antitumor and endocrine 
effects of long-term firstline combined endocrine treatment with buserelin (an LHRH agonist) and 
tamoxifen compared with treatment with each drug alone. 


The patients were premenopausal and had metastatic or locally advanced breast  cancer. Eligibility
criteria also  included a positive estrogen receptor and/or progesterone receptor status (ù10
fmol/mg of protein),  irrespective of the duration of the disease-free interval, or an unknown
steroid receptor status  and a disease-free interval of at least 2 years or longer.


The following patients were excluded from the study, those with tumors that were both estrogen 
receptor negative and progesterone receptor negative, those with a poor performance status (World 
Health Organization [WHO] status of >3), those with rapidly progressing life-threatening disease 
(including extensive liver metastases, carcinomatous lymphangitic disease of the lungs, or
centralnervous system metastases), those with increased concentrations of plasma bilirubin (>30
mmol/L) or  creatinine (>150 mmol/L), those with other concurrent or past malignancies (with the
exception of  adequately treated basal or squamous cell cancer of the skin and in situ carcinoma of
the cervix),  and those who were pregnant. However, patients with previous adjuvant treatment with
tamoxifen and/or chemotherapy were allowed if they had received no adjuvant  chemotherapy for at
least 6 months, if they had received no treatment with tamoxifen for more than  1 year before entry,
and if amenorrhea had not occurred. These treatments were 1)  buserelin implants (6.6 mg implanted
subcutaneously every 8 weeks, during the first 12 weeks, every  6 weeks), 2) a daily dose of
tamoxifen (40 mg administered orally), or 3) a combination of both  drugs at the same dosages. 


Methods and Follow-up.At each visit, all complaints, vaginal bleeding, hot flashes,  and other side
effects were recorded, in addition to medications taken and performance status. At  each visit, a
physical examination, measurement of palpable lesions, and limited blood tests  (alkaline
phosphatase and g-glutamyltransferase) were also carried out. Complete routine hematologyand blood
chemistry were done every 16 weeks. Objective clinical assessment included specific  x-rays,
computed tomography scans of liver lesions, and photographs of skin metastasis every 8–16  weeks, as
appropriate, and bone scans every 6 months. 


In our analysis of the three treatment arms, we compared two time-to-event end points, 
progression-free survival and overall survival, as well as one ordered categorical end point, 
objective response rate, which consisted of four categories (i.e., complete remission, partial 
remission, no change, and progressive disease). In addition,stratified analyses were done for the
time-to-event end points, based  on the Cox proportional hazards model (36) with the use of patient
characteristics for which there appeared to be an imbalance as stratification factors (e.g., WHO
performance status). 


Furthermore, the effect of four prognostic factors—i.e., disease-free interval (<2 years or ù2 
years), age (ø40 years or >40 years), dominant site of disease (soft tissue, bone, or visceral), 
and adjuvant chemotherapy (yes or no)—on progression-free survival was studied and tested by the 
log-rank test. In addition, the four categories were combined into two categories—i.e., responders 
(containing the categories complete remission and partial remission) and nonresponders(containing
the categories no change and progressive disease)—and a x2 test was done on this binary  variable
(39). 


The protocol violations  included incorrect receptor status (three patients), postmenopausal status
(one patient),  neoadjuvant chemotherapy (one patient), brain metastasis (one patient), treatment
refusal (one  patient), and early termination of tamoxifen after 3 days because of hot flashes (one
patient).  A statistically significant difference was observed only for performance status, showing
a slightly more favorable distribution in the group treated  with tamoxifen. 


The overall log-rank test for overall survival showed that  these values were statistically
significantly different (P 4 .01) (Fig. 2). 


The interaction between treatment and disease-free interval, however, was not statistically
significant for progression-free survival (P 4 .43) and overall survival (P 4 .93). 


In the two groups of patients treated with buserelin alone or buserelin with tamoxifen, both the 
median and the mean levels of plasma estradiol dropped to normal postmenopausal values within 6 
weeks and remained suppressed throughout treatment in all patients (Table 4 and Fig. 4). 


Our combined-treatment regimen of buserelin and tamoxifen completely suppressed the 
tamoxifen-stimulated pituitary–ovarian axis and resulted in plasma estrogen levels that were 
similar to those observed during treatment with buserelin alone. In our trial, progression-free 
survival (P 4 .03) and overall survival (P 4 .01) in the group receiving combined treatment were 
statistically significantly superior to those in the groups receiving single-drug treatment (Figs. 
1 and 2). 


However, patients with estrogen receptor-negative tumors or an unknown  estrogen receptor
status,irrespective of the length of the disease-free interval, were also  included in this study,
which “diluted” the patient population with patients who had  hormone-resistant breast cancer. 
Furthermore, preliminaryresults of a recent meta-analysis of 506 patients treated in four randomized
trials (including this  study) showed that, for all three efficacy parameters (i.e., response rate,
progression-free survival, and overall survival), combined treatment with an LHRH agonist plus
tamoxifen was  superior to treatment with an LHRH agonist alone. 


Probably because we excluded steroid receptor-negative patients, visceral metastasis was not an 
important prognostic factor for progression-free survival and overall survival, but a relative high 
overall response rate of 39% for all treatment groups together was found (even about 60% during 
combined treatment). The highly heterogeneous conditions of individual patients during the course of
metastatic disease require various treatment approaches. Thus, the most striking observation in our
study is the highly statistically significant  improvement in overall survival of patients receiving
the combination treatment.


The greater reduction in tumor load might have  increased the sensitivity of the tumor to other
types of subsequent treatment because of the  general relationship between tumor load and resistance
to treatment. Ablation of functioning ovaries and combination chemotherapy with  cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) have similar effects on disease-free  survival and overall
survival. This hypothesis is supported by the results of two randomized trials that show that 
adjuvant endocrine therapy,consisting of surgical or medical castration and treatment with 
tamoxifen, was statistically significantly superior to standard chemotherapy with FAC 
(5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin [i.e.


We suggest that future studies also add aromatase inhibitors to  the combined-treatment regimen,
this treatment should further suppress plasma estradiol levels.
