However, the group of premenopausal women treated with tamoxifen had very high levels of plasma estradiol,sometimes for many years, because of the tamoxifen-inducedstimulation of pituitary–ovarian functions. The possible deleterious effects of these high levels of plasma estradiol,which can compete with tamoxifen for binding to estrogen receptors, have been debated for many years. In contrast,for hormone-dependent breast cancer cells, in vitro studies have shown that long-term withdrawal of estrogens increased the sensitivity of these cells to estradiol, suggesting that the addition of an antiestrogen might be valuable. Endocrine studies showed that an LHRHagonist given subcutaneously completely suppressed the tamoxifen stimulation of pituitary and ovarian functions and resulted in plasma estrogen levels that were comparable to normal postmenopausal levels. To our knowledge, this study is the only three-arm, randomized study to investigate these treatments for metastatic breast cancer in premenopausal women.

PATIENTS AND METHODS
Patients and Treatment
During the period from 1988 through 1995, a total of 161 patients were recruited by 17 centers from nine countries. The patients were premenopausal and had metastatic or locally advanced breast cancer. All patients had histologically proved breast cancer with at least one measurable lesion or a lesion that could be evaluated at the start of treatment. Patients were randomly assigned by the EORTC Data Center to receive one of three first-line treatments (Table 1). These treatmentswere 1) buserelin implants (6.6 mg implanted subcutaneously every 8weeks, during the first 12 weeks, every 6 weeks), 2) a daily dose of tamoxifen(40 mg administered orally), or 3) a combination of both drugs at the same dosages. When disease progression was detected, a crossover of drugs (tamoxifenafter buserelin or buserelin after tamoxifen) in the single-treatment arms wasadvised but was not mandatory. Objective clinical assessment included specific x-rays, computed tomography scans of liver lesions, and photographsof skin metastasis every 8–16 weeks, as appropriate, and bone scansevery 6 months. Values below the detection level of the respective estradiolassays were given the limiting value of the assay. Between centers, the upper levels of normal postmenopausal plasma concentrations varied from 19 pg/mL to38 pg/mL. Steroid receptor determinations were performed by aligand-binding assay according to guidelines of the EORTC Biomarker StudyGroup (30), by enzyme immunoassays (31), or infrequently by immunohistochemistry. For patients with bone metastases and a complete response, complete remineralization of lytic lesions in the bone was required, or, for a partial response, a clear improvement accompanied by adecrease in pain was required. Bisphosphonates were not used in this study. The three treatment arms were also compared pairwise by the x2 test. Again, each pairwise comparison was tested at the statistical significance level of .02. A separate but similar analysis was performed after adding data from patients who had had stable disease for more than 6 months to the objective response category (complete remission, partial remission,and no change for >6 months). If a statistically significant effect was obtained, a logistic regression model with and without the interaction term was fitted, and the two models were again compared by the likelihood ratio test corresponding to a test for interaction. The patient and tumor characteristics were well balanced over the three treatment groups (Table 2). Thirty-five (66%) of the 53 patients in the combined treatmentgroup died, 43 (80%) of the 54 patients in the grouptreated with buserelin alone died, and 44 (81%) of the 54 patients in the group treated with tamoxifen alone died. Even when additional stratified log-rank tests were done, because of a slight imbalance in performance status (in favor of thetamoxifen treatment group), the results and conclusions did not change, indicating that the combined treatment was always better than the single-drug treatments. For survival after disease progression, comparison ofthe single-treatment arms with the combined treatmentarm showed differences, with unadjusted P values of .03 for buserelin alone and .088 fortamoxifen alone. Survival values for the grouptreated with buserelin alone and for the grouptreated with tamoxifen alone were very similar(P 4 .41). Patients with a disease-free interval of 2 years or longer had a median time to disease progression of 8.3 months, and patients with a disease-free interval of less than 2 years hada median time to disease progression of 6.4 months. The dominant site of disease was the only prognosticfactor that had a statistically significant effect on the objective response rate (P4.021). The objective response rate was 59% for patients with soft-tissue disease, 27% for patients with bone metastases,and 39% for patients with visceral metastases. The interaction between treatment and dominant site, however, was not statistically significant(P 4 .078), although this interaction test is not powerful and is based on a restricted number of patients in each subgroup. 

Endocrine Effects on Plasma Estradiol Levelsand Menstrual Cycle and Side Effects 
All patients with at least one estradiol measurementresult before and/or during treatment were included in the endocrine study. Some patients could not be evaluated for amenorrhea and/or hot flashes because of a short period of treatment caused by early progressive disease, a prior hysterectomy without ovariectomy,or missing data. ot flashes occurred less frequently (P<.001) during treatment with tamoxifen alone (17 of 43 patients, 40%) than during treatment with buserelin alone (38 of 43 patients,88%) or during the combination treatment (41 of 47 patients,87%). Nausea in the group treated with tamoxifen alone might have been partly related to the high plasma levels of estradiol that were comparable to those observed during pregnancy. In addition, no differences with respect to survival and the results of surgical castration were observed. However, within the subgroup of 115 patients with skeletal metastases only, statistically significant differences in favor of combination therapy were seen for the objective response rate,time to disease progression, and survival. Unfortunately, a meta-analysis on comparisons between a combined-treatment arm and treatment with tamoxifen alone is not possible because of the lack of such studies. Probably because we excluded steroid receptor-negative patients, visceral metastasis was not an important prognostic factor for progression-free survival and overall survival, but a relative high overall responserate of 39% for all treatment groups together was found (even about 60% during combined treatment). Thus, our unexpected observation that patients receiving the combined first-line endocrine treatment tended to survive longer after disease progression(Fig. 3) is important—this in spite of the fact that fewer optional endocrine treatments were available for this group from the time of detection of progressive disease during first-line endocrine therapy. The results of our study may also aid in the interpretation ofresults from published and ongoing (adjuvant) studies on standard-dose and high-dose chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapyis more effective in premenopausal women than in postmenopausalwomen, and this effect is positively associated with chemotherapeutically induced castration in nearly all trials. Ablation of functioning ovaries and combination chemotherapywith cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil(CMF) have similar effects on disease-free survival and overall survival. 

High-dose chemotherapy induces chemical castration in nearly 100% of the patients, in contrast to standard dose chemotherapy, and high-dose chemotherapy is followed by adjuvant tamoxifen therapy in nearly all trials. Thus, the combination of high-dose chemotherapy and tamoxifen can also indirectly result in “complete estrogen blockade” in (nearly) all patients, in contrast to standard treatment. 
Consequently, a small difference in survival in favor of high-dose chemotherapycan (at least partly) be explained by differences in indirect endocrine effects. Recently, in addition to combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and 5-fluorouracil (CAF),combined tratment with goserelin and tamoxifen was shown to statistically significantly improve the disease-free survival (from67% to 78%), but treatment with goserelin alone did not.
