

Many steroid and peptide hormones, growth factors, and other trophic substances are involved in the 
growth regulation of breast cancer. Endocrine treatment of breast cancer is designed to decrease 
plasma concentrations of one or more of these hormones and growth factors or to inhibit the 
biologic effects of these trophic substances directly in the tumor cell. Deprivation or antagonism 
of estradiol, a growth-stimulating hormone for estrogen-dependent breast cancers, is especially 
important. After DeSombre et al. showed that a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone  (LHRH)
analogue could induce tumor regression in an experimental tumor model system, the results of  the
first clinical study with an LHRH analogue were reported by Klijn and de Jong. A recent randomized
study of 138 premenopausal patients with estrogen receptor-positive  and progesterone
receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer showed that treatment with the LHRH  agonist goserelin
resulted in failure-free survival and overall survival similar to those observed after ovariectomy.


The patients were premenopausal and had metastatic or locally advanced breast  cancer. All patients
had histologically proved breast cancer with at least one measurable  lesion or a lesion that could
be evaluated at the start of treatment. Eligibility criteria also  included a positive estrogen
receptor and/or progesterone receptor status (ù10 fmol/mg of protein),  irrespective of the duration
of the disease-free interval, or an unknown steroid receptor status  and a disease-free interval of
at least 2 years or longer.


The following patients were excluded from the study, those with tumors that were both estrogen 
receptor negative and progesterone receptor negative, those with a poor performance status (World 
Health Organization [WHO] status of >3), those with rapidly progressing life-threatening disease 
(including extensive liver metastases, carcinomatous lymphangitic disease of the lungs, or
centralnervous system metastases), those with increased concentrations of plasma bilirubin (>30
mmol/L) or  creatinine (>150 mmol/L), those with other concurrent or past malignancies (with the
exception of  adequately treated basal or squamous cell cancer of the skin and in situ carcinoma of
the cervix),  and those who were pregnant. However, patients with previous adjuvant treatment with
tamoxifen and/or chemotherapy were allowed if they had received no adjuvant  chemotherapy for at
least 6 months, if they had received no treatment with tamoxifen for more than  1 year before entry,
and if amenorrhea had not occurred. 


Methods and Follow-up.At each visit, all complaints, vaginal bleeding, hot flashes,  and other side
effects were recorded, in addition to medications taken and performance status. At  each visit, a
physical examination, measurement of palpable lesions, and limited blood tests  (alkaline
phosphatase and g-glutamyltransferase) were also carried out. 


In our analysis of the three treatment arms, we compared two time-to-event end points, 
progression-free survival and overall survival, as well as one ordered categorical end point, 
objective response rate, which consisted of four categories (i.e., complete remission, partial 
remission, no change, and progressive disease). 


For the prognostic factors that statistically significantly influenced  progression-free survival, a
Cox proportional hazards model was fitted with and without the  interaction between the treatment
and the prognostic factor. A test for interaction used the  likelihood ratio test to compare these
two models (37). In addition, the four categories were combined into two categories—i.e., responders
 (containing the categories complete remission and partial remission) and nonresponders(containing
the categories no change and progressive disease)—and a x2 test was done on this binary  variable
(39). A separate but similar  analysis was performed after adding data from patients who had had
stable disease for more than6 months to the objective response category (complete remission, partial
remission, and no change  for >6 months). If a statistically significant effect was obtained, a
logistic  regression model with and without the interaction term was fitted, and the two models were
again  compared by the likelihood ratio test corresponding to a test for interaction. 


Nine patients were ineligible and were not evaluated, and seven additional eligible  patients could
not be evaluated. The protocol violations  included incorrect receptor status (three patients),
postmenopausal status (one patient),  neoadjuvant chemotherapy (one patient), brain metastasis (one
patient), treatment refusal (one  patient), and early termination of tamoxifen after 3 days because
of hot flashes (one patient).  


Excluding patients who could not be evaluated, the objective response rate (complete remission and 
partial remission) was better in the group treated with the combination therapy (23 of 48 patients, 
48%) than in the groups treated with buserelin alone (16 of 47 patients, 34%) or tamoxifen alone 
(14 of 50 patients, 28%) (Table 3). When we include the data from the 16 patients who could not be 
evaluated in the second category (no change and progressive disease), the same P values (both P 4 
.13) resulted. 


Compared with patients in the combined-treatment arm, patients treated with buserelin alone or 
tamoxifen alone had a lower chance of having an objective response (complete remission and partial 
remission, odds ratios of 0.56 and 0.42, respectively). 


The three treatment arms differed statistically significantly from each other with regard to 
progression-free survival (Table 3), with the median times to disease progression being 9.7 months 
for patients in the combined-treatment group, 6.3 months for patients treated with buserelin alone, 
and 5.6 months for patients treated with tamoxifen alone (P 4 .03, overall logrank test) (Fig. 1).  


Even when additional stratified log-rank tests were done, because of a slight imbalance in 
performance status (in favor of the tamoxifen treatment group), the results and conclusions did not
change, indicating that the combined treatment was always better than the single-drug treatments. 
Compared with  patients receiving combined treatment, patients treated with buserelin alone or
tamoxifen alone  showed hazard ratios of 1.7–1.45 for survival after disease progression. 


The disease-free interval was the only prognostic factor that had a statistically significant 
effect on progression-free survival (P 4 .011) and overall survival (P 4 .02). The median time to
death was 39.9 months for patients with a  disease-free interval of 2 or more years, it was 32
months for patients with a disease-free  interval of less than 2 years. 


In the two groups of patients treated with buserelin alone or buserelin with tamoxifen, both the 
median and the mean levels of plasma estradiol dropped to normal postmenopausal values within 6 
weeks and remained suppressed throughout treatment in all patients (Table 4 and Fig. 4). In the same
patients, this increase fluctuated widely  during treatment but persisted for years throughout
treatment with values of 1000 pg/mL or more (Table 4). 


Those studies showed that medical treatment and surgical ablation are equally effective. In our
trial, progression-free  survival (P 4 .03) and overall survival (P 4 .01) in the group receiving
combined treatment were  statistically significantly superior to those in the groups receiving
single-drug treatment (Figs.  1 and 2). 


A second, larger international study of 318  patients showed, in concordance with our study, a
statistically significantly improved progression-free survival after combined treatment compared
with that after a single treatment with goserelin  (P 4 .03) but no statistically significant
improvement in the survival or objective response rate (38% versus 31%). 


The greater reduction in tumor load might have  increased the sensitivity of the tumor to other
types of subsequent treatment because of the  general relationship between tumor load and resistance
to treatment. Thus, our unexpected  observation that patients receiving the combined
first-lineendocrine treatment tended to survive  longer after disease progression (Fig. 3) is
important—this in spite of the fact that fewer  optional endocrine treatments were available for
this group from the time of detection of  progressive disease during first-line endocrine therapy. 
The results of our study may also aid in  the interpretation of results from published and ongoing
(adjuvant) studies on standard-dose and  high-dose chemotherapy. Ablation of functioning ovaries and
combination chemotherapy with  cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) have similar
effects on disease-free  survival and overall survival. This hypothesis is supported by the results
of two randomized trials that show that  adjuvant endocrine therapy,consisting of surgical or
medical castration and treatment with  tamoxifen, was statistically significantly superior to
standard chemotherapy with FAC  (5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin [i.e.
