20|A|CERVICAL cancer is the second most frequent cancer among women worldwide and the most frequent cancer among women in Africa , Asia , and South America .
3|I|The ability of radiotherapy to cure locally advanced cervical cancer is limited by the size of the tumor , because the doses required to treat large tumors exceed the limit of toxicity in normal tissue .
11|I|At the time we were developing the protocol used in the current study , radiotherapy plus concomitant chemotherapy with hydroxyurea was the standard combined-therapy regimen for advanced cervical cancer , because an early analysis of the combination of radiation , cisplatin , and fluorouracil failed to show improved progression-free survival .
12|M|However , myelosuppression is a limiting toxic effect of treatment with hydroxyurea , whereas cisplatin is less myelosuppressive and can be given weekly during radiotherapy , with acceptable levels of toxicity .
9|M|In our study , to improve the efficacy of the cisplatin and fluorouracil combination , we added hydroxyurea to the regimen , because of evidence that this drug inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and depletes tumor cells of deoxyuridine monophosphate .
10|M|Therefore , we undertook a randomized study in which all women with locally advanced cervical cancer received local radiation as well as weekly concomitant treatment with cisplatin alone , the combination of cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , or hydroxyurea alone .
13|M|Women with untreated invasive squamous-cell carcinoma , adenosquamous carcinoma , or adenocarcinoma of the cervix of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIB (localized disease with parametrial involvement) , stage III (extension of the tumor to the pelvic wall) , or stage IVB (involvement of the bladder or rectal mucosa) were enrolled in the study from April 1992 to April 1997 .
14|M|Radiotherapy was administered to the whole pelvic region in 24 fractions totaling 40.8 Gy or 30 fractions totaling 51.0 Gy , followed one to three weeks later by intracavitary brachytherapy (the insertion of a radioactive implant) .
15|M|The patients were randomly assigned to receive one of three chemotherapy regimens , which were given concomitantly with external-beam radiotherapy (Table 1) .
16|M|Progression was defined as a 50 percent increase in the product of the two largest diameters of the primary tumor or metastasis .
17|M|Survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit .
7|M|Thus , a total of 526 patients were included in the analysis , 176 in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy , 173 in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , and 177 in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy .
8|D|There were no significant differences in the clinical characteristics among the three treatment groups (Table 2) .
6|R|Patients who received the platinum-based regimens had significantly longer progression-free survival than those who received hydroxyurea (P<0.001 for both comparisons) (Fig. 1) .
19|R|After adjustment for the clinical stage of disease , the relative risk of death was 0.61 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.44 to 0.85) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.58 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.41 to 0.81) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy .
4|R|Survival rates were also significantly better in these two groups (P=0.004 and P=0.002 , respectively) than in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (Fig. 2) .
18|D|Hematologic toxicity was the principal adverse effect in this trial .
5|D|In our study , the duration of radiotherapy and the dose of radiation were similar among the three regimens , implying that the differences in progression-free survival and survival were related to the chemotherapy .
1|R|Our results demonstrate the superiority of radiotherapy and chemotherapy either with cisplatin alone or with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IIB , III , or IVA without metastasis to the para-aortic lymph nodes) .
2|D|We recommend cisplatin as the standard drug for radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer .
