20|I|Therefore  , we undertook a randomized study in which all women with locally advanced cervical cancer received local radiation as well as weekly concomitant treatment with cisplatin alone  , the combination of cisplatin  , fluorouracil  , and hydroxyurea  , or hydroxyurea alone .
12|M|Women with untreated invasive squamous-cell carcinoma  , adenosquamous carcinoma , or adenocarcinoma of the cervix of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIB (localized disease with parametrial involvement) , stage III (extension of the tumor to the pelvic wall) , or stage IVB (involvement of the bladder or rectal mucosa) were enrolled in the study from April 1992 to April 1997 .
13|M|Radiotherapy was administered to the whole pelvic region in 24 fractions totaling 40.8 Gy or 30 fractions totaling 51.0 Gy , followed one to three weeks later by intracavitary brachytherapy (the insertion of a radioactive implant) .
14|M|The patients were randomly assigned to receive one of three chemotherapy regimens , which were given concomitantly with external-beam radiotherapy (Table 1) .
15|M|The primary end points were survival and progression-free survival .
16|M|Progression was defined as a 50 percent increase in the product of the two largest diameters of the primary tumor or metastasis .
11|R|From April 1992 to April 1997 , 575 patients were enrolled , 192 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin , 191 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , and 192 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with hydroxyurea .
4|R|The relative risk of progression of disease or death was 0.57 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.42 to 0.78) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.55 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.40 to 0.75) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy , after adjustment for the clinical stage of disease .
5|R|Patients who received the platinum-based regimens had significantly longer progression-free survival than those who received hydroxyurea (P<0.001 for both comparisons) (Fig. 1) .
6|R|The rates of progression-free survival at 24 months were 67 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy , 64 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , and 47 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy .
17|R|The median duration of follow-up was 35 months .
7|R|After adjustment for the clinical stage of disease , the relative risk of death was 0.61 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.44 to 0.85) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.58 (95 percent confidence interval , 0.41 to 0.81) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea , as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy .
8|R|Survival rates were also significantly better in these two groups (P=0.004 and P=0.002 , respectively) than in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (Fig. 2) .
9|R|Patients in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea had less local progression (19 percent and 20 percent , respectively) than those in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (30 percent) .
10|R|The frequencies of both grade 3 and grade 4 leukopenia in the group given radio-therapy combined with treatment with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea were more than double the frequencies in the other two groups (P<0.001) .
18|D|Cisplatin is believed to augment the effects of radiation by inhibiting the repair of radiation-induced sublethal damage and by sensitizing hypoxic cells to radiation .
19|D|Because of its cytotoxic effect , the drug reduces the bulk of tumors , which leads to reoxygenation of the tumor and entry of the cells into a radiation-sensitive phase of the cell cycle .
1|D|Our results demonstrate the superiority of radiotherapy and chemotherapy either with cisplatin alone or with cisplatin , fluorouracil , and hydroxyurea in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IIB , III , or IVA without metastasis to the para-aortic lymph nodes) .
2|D|Treatment with cisplatin alone was less toxic than treatment with the three-drug regimen .
3|D|We recommend cisplatin as the standard drug for radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer .
