

This result has been attributed to micrometastases, which determine prognosis regardless of the
effect of the locoregional therapy. In the late 1970s, adjuvant chemotherapy became a standard
treatment for high-risk premenopausal patients with breast cancer.


Nevertheless, there are reasons to reconsider radiotherapy, including the limited value of adjuvant
chemotherapy for bulky disease, a synergistic effect of chemotherapy plus radiation on residual
locoregional tumor, and the possibility that eliminating bulky disease with radiation may improve
the effect of chemotherapy, because chemotherapy may be more effective when the overall disease
burden is low.


From 1979 through 1986, 318 premenopausal women with newly diagnosed stage I or II breast cancer
were enrolled in the study after undergoing modified radical mastectomy if, after axillary-node
dissection, one or more level I or II lymph nodes were found to be positive on pathological
examination. 


The mid-axilla received a dose of 35 Gy through an anterior supraclavicular–axillary field with a
posterior axillary boost. Also, as part of a second randomization, 68 patients with
estrogen-positive tumors were treated with radiationinduced ovarian ablation that included 20 Gy
over a period of five days plus prednisone (7.5 mg per day) for two years, as described by Meakin et
al. Among these 68 patients, 33 were assigned to chemotherapy and 35 were assigned to chemotherapy
and radiotherapy. 


Significance levels, estimates of relative risk, and 95 percent confidence intervals were calculated
with a proportional-hazards  regression model. Two-sided P values of less than 0.05 were considered
to represent statistical significance. The analysis was donefor the whole group of 318 patients and
also for subgroups with involvement in either one to three axillary nodes or four or more nodes. All
11  patients were alive and had no recurrences at their last known follow-up. 


There was an overall reduction of 34 percent in the rate of systemic recurrence (relative risk,
0.66, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.49 to 0.89, P 0.006) in the group treated with combined
therapy (75 of 164 patients vs. 94 of 154 patients in the group treated only with chemotherapy), and
a 17-percentage-point improvement in systemic disease-free survival (Fig. 2). Mortality from breast
cancer was reduced by 29 percent in the chemotherapy–radiotherapy group (relative risk, 0.71, 95
percent confidence interval,0.51 to 0.99, P 0.05), with 62 deaths, as compared with 76 in the
chemotherapy-only group, which represented an improvement of 10 percentage points in
breast-cancer–specific survival (Fig. 3). 


We considered this event related not to the adjuvant radiation but rather to treatment with
doxorubicin, which was given at a cumulative dose of 540 mg for metastases to the lung and pleura. 


This study of premenopausal women with breast cancer demonstrates that locoregional radiotherapy
reduces the rates of locoregional and systemic relapses and the chance of dying from breast cancer. 
The benefits of radiotherapy found in our study, but not in most earlier studies, merit comment. A
previous meta-analysis and several individual trials found that the latter was due to a substantial
increase in mortality from cardiac causes. Also, in various past trials different areas were
encompassed in the irradiated volume, and the trials differed in techniques of radiation, treatment
planning, age, nodal status, and the use of adjuvant chemotherapy. 


The other eight studies were notsimilar to ours or the Danish trial, either because the number of
randomized premenopausal patients was small or because the radiotherapy techniques or the
chemotherapy schedules were heterogeneous. 


Four randomized trials comparing breast irradiation with no irradiation in patients who underwent
conservative surgery showed significant reductions in the rate of relapse in the breast but no
effect on systemic recurrences or overall survival. 
