<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0787</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Rectal cancer is one of the most common malignant diseases with 11 500 cases diagnosed in the UK in 1994 alone.  *eos Little change has been seen in survival rates, which remain at about 40% at 5 years from diagnosis.  *eos In an attempt to increase the rate of curative resection and hence survival, several trials have investigated the role of preoperative radiotherapy in treatment of rectal cancer.  *eos The first UK Medical Research Council (MRC) trial of preoperative radiotherapy for rectal cancer was a three-arm randomised trial with 824 patients comparing a control (surgery alone) group with a group treated with 20 Gy given in 10 equal fractions and another treated with a single exposure of 5 Gy.  *eos These doses of radiation were chosen after trials by the Veterans Administration Surgical Adjuvant Group and the Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, suggested survival advantage with radiotherapy for patients with tumours of Dukes stage C.  *eos Despite the suggestion of a real biological effect of the radiotherapy in the first MRC trial, with significant changes in tumour stage, no advantage was found for either radiotherapy group over the control group in terms of disease recurrence or survival.  *eos However, the trial did demonstrate the importance of fixity as a prognostic factor. 80% of mobile tumours had apparently curative resections compared with 50% of partially fixed, and 30% of fixed tumours.  *eos The importance of fixity was reflected in the survival pattern, 5-year survival for fixed or partially fixed tumours was just 29% compared with 48% for mobile tumours.  *eos 

In 1981, the MRC began this trial of a higher dose of preoperative radiotherapy in patients with fixed or partially fixed tumours of the rectum who were thought to be suitable for abdominoperineal excision or anterior restorative resection.  *eos The aim was to increase the number of patients in whom curative resection could be done, and so improve survival rates.  *eos The dose of radiation (40 Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks) was chosen as the highest that was deemed safe before anterior resection with the wide-field technique proposed.  *eos We present the results of this trial with a minimum follow-up time for surviving patients of 5 years.  *eos 

Patients and methods.  *eos 

Eligible patients were men or women younger than 80 years who, had histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the rectum partially or totally fixed within the pelvis with the lower margin of the tumour within 15 cm of the anal verge, were deemed suitable and fit for the proposed treatment and available for regular follow-up, were free of disseminated disease (confirmed by clinical and radiological examination), and had had no previous malignant disease.  *eos We gained local ethics committee approval for the study and consent from the participants.  *eos 

When an eligible patient was enrolled, the randomised treatment allocation was obtained by means of a telephone call to the MRC Cancer Trials Office in Cambridge.  *eos Eligibility was confirmed and treatment allocated by minimisation on three factors, treatment centre, extension of tumour (fixed or partially fixed), and intended operation (abdominoperineal excision or anterior restorative resection).  *eos Patients then proceeded to immediate surgery or to radiotherapy followed by surgery after a minimum of 4 weeks.  *eos 

Megavoltage radiotherapy was started as soon as possible after randomisation.  *eos Two parallel opposed fields 18 cm by 15 cm were positioned to cover the tumour with an adequate proximal margin (normally 5 cm). 20 daily fractions of 2 Gy at the mid-plane central axis of the volume of the tumour were given over 4 weeks.  *eos 

Patients were seen every 3 months for 1 year, then every 6 months for 4 years.  *eos Patients who completed 5 years follow-up and those who were lost to follow-up were flagged on the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) register so that we would be notified of date and cause of death.  *eos At each visit, the status of the abdominal and perineal wounds was assessed, late complications of treatment recorded, and evidence of local or distant recurrence noted.  *eos Criteria for suspicion of local recurrence were pain, increasing in severity and requiring medication, or disturbance of bladder function, induration in the perineum or pelvis on examination, or palpation of a mass in the pelvis or at the anastomosis.  *eos Biopsy samples were taken whenever possible, and pelvic radiography was done to look for evidence of bone destruction.  *eos 

Event-free times were recorded from the date of randomisation.  *eos For the analyses the date of first local recurrence was taken as the date of the first new clinical or histological evidence of local recurrence, we included an assessment of clinical evidence of local recurrence at death.  *eos The date of first confirmed distant recurrence was also recorded.  *eos Disease-free survival time was measured from randomisation to the first event (local or distant recurrence, or death from any cause).  *eos For all these endpoints, event-free times were censored at 5 years from randomisation, because at this point a large proportion of surviving patients had been discharged from hospital follow-up, and accurate continuing data on disease recurrence were no longer available.  *eos Survival times were not censored at 5 years, all surviving patients have been flagged on the OPCS central register, and were presumed alive on Jan 1, 1995.  *eos 

Statistical analysis. *eos 

We intended to enrol 450 patients (with the anticipation of 251 deaths), this sample size would have provided 90% power to detect a 15% increase in the 3-year survival rate (from 35% to 50%), which was thought plausible at the time the trial was designed.  *eos Based on accrual to the previous MRC preoperative radiotherapy trial, we expected that this number would be accrued in 4 to 5 years.  *eos 

Proportions were compared by the  2 test, and ordered categorical data by the Mann-Whitney test.  *eos Survival curves were calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method, and compared by the Mantel-Cox version of the log-rank test.  *eos Hazard ratios were calculated for all endpoints, a hazard ratio of less than 1 indicates benefit to the radiotherapy group.  *eos All analyses were carried out by intention to treat.  *eos 

Results. *eos 

Recruitment into the trial started in November, 1981, and ended in November, 1989, when 279 patients had been enrolled, 140 patients were allocated surgery alone and 139 preoperative radiotherapy (figure 1).  *eos Recruitment, initially steady, declined after publication, and perhaps misinterpretation, of the disappointing results of the first MRC trial of low-dose radiotherapy.  *eos After 7 years of accrual, only slightly more than half the required number of patients had been entered.  *eos We decided to continue the trial only until the launch, in November, 1989, of the UK Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research (UKCCCR) adjuvant X-ray and fluorouracil infusion study (AXIS) for treatment of colorectal cancer.  *eos This ongoing trial includes randomisation with respect to preoperative radiotherapy for rectal tumours.  *eos 

Of the 279 patients, 217 died.  *eos The surviving patients were followed-up for a minimum of 5 years with the exception of seven patients, lost to follow-up within 5 years of randomisation, who could not be traced through the OPCS and were censored at the date last known to be alive.  *eos 

Pretreatment characteristics of the patients were well balanced (table 1). 69 (49%) of 140 patients allocated surgery only had partially fixed tumours and 71 (51%) had fixed tumours.  *eos Of the 139 patients who had radiotherapy and surgery 69 (50%) had fixed tumours and 70 (50%) had fixed tumours.  *eos Abdominoperineal excision was the intended operation for about two-thirds of patients in both groups.  *eos 

125 (90%) patients received the planned dose of 40 Gy over 4 weeks.  *eos Nine patients received less than the prescribed dose of radiation, two received no radiotherapy because they were judged too ill, three failed to complete the full treatment because of their deteriorating condition, and treatment was stopped early in four patients (ischiorectal abscess and perineal breakdown, bowel obstruction, a prearranged time for surgery, and refusal to continue by the patient).  *eos A further five patients received slightly higher doses of radiation than planned to accommodate altered fractionation schedules.  *eos 

Of patients who received radiotherapy, 61 (45%) of 137 reported no significant morbidity. 45 (33%) of all patients suffered diarrhoea and 30 (22%) had skin reactions.  *eos Only four (3%) patients complained of nausea and 3 (2%) of abdominal pain.  *eos 

The median time from randomisation to surgery was 7 days (IQR 4.12 days) for patients allocated immediate surgery and 73 days (64.84) for those allocated preoperative radiotherapy.  *eos The distribution of type of surgery done was very similar in the two treatment groups (table 2), with about half the patients in each group having abdominoperineal excision.  *eos The presence of residual disease in the pelvis, abdomen, or both, was assessed.  *eos Of patients allocated radiotherapy, 73 (55%) were found to have no residual disease, compared with 66 (48%) of the patients who had surgery alone.  *eos Surgeons were asked to assess whether the operation had been curative, palliative, or indeterminate.  *eos Of patients allocated surgery alone, 56 (40%) of 140 were thought to have had curative operations compared with 66 (47%) of 139 patients allocated radiotherapy (p=0.21).  *eos 

Three patients allocated surgery alone were considered unfit for surgery.  *eos Nine patients allocated preoperative radiotherapy did not have surgery-seven were not fit, one patient refused, and one was not referred back after radiotherapy.  *eos 

The presence or absence of each of six specific postoperative (occurring within 30 days of surgery) complications was recorded, together with any postoperative deaths (table 3).  *eos Surgeons were also asked to report any other complications.  *eos There was no evidence of an excess of complications in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

Pathological assessment of the resected tissue was done for patients from both treatment groups (table 4).  *eos 

Tumours were significantly smaller in the radiotherapy group (Mann-Whitney, p.0.0001).  *eos The proportion of tumours graded as Dukes C was significantly lower in the radiotherapy group than in the surgery alone group (29 vs 59%, p.0.0002) and the number of involved lymph nodes was also smaller.  *eos However, the number of lymph nodes examined was lower in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

At follow-up, surgeons were asked to report on the status of the patients' abdominal and (if applicable) perineal wounds, and to describe, in broad terms, any late complications.  *eos Again, there was no evidence of an increased number of late complications in the radiotherapy group, two patients in each treatment group still had complications of the abdominal wounds 12 months after surgery.  *eos Among those who had abdominoperineal excision, four of 49 patients who had surgery alone who were assessable at 12 months had complications of the perineal wound compared with seven of 56 patients allocated radiotherapy.  *eos The most common complications that occurred throughout follow-up were of the genitourinary system, these occurred in 18 patients in each treatment group.  *eos Complications associated with the colostomy were reported in ten surgery alone patients and eight radiotherapy patients, and five patients in each group had anastomosis-related complications after anterior restorative resection.  *eos 

Figure 2 shows Kaplan-Meier curves for time free of local recurrence. 65 patients allocated surgery alone had a recurrence compared with 50 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos The log-rank comparison suggests an advantage for the radiotherapy group of borderline statistical significance (p=0¡¤04).  *eos The hazard ratio is 0¡¤68 (95% CI of 0.47-0.98), which suggests that preoperative radiotherapy reduces the risk of local recurrence by a third.  *eos However, the data are compatible with a reduction in the risk of as much as a half or as little as 2%.  *eos 

Survival free of distant recurrence is also shown in figure 2. 67 patients allocated surgery alone had a distant recurrence compared with 49 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos A reduction in the risk of metastatic recurrence was found which was, rather unexpectedly, of a similar order to the reduction in local recurrence (hazard ratio 0.66 [0.46-0.95], log-rank p=0.02).  *eos 

Consistent with the results of the individual endpoints, results for disease-free survival also suggest a benefit to the radiotherapy patients (hazard ratio 0.76 [0.58-1.0], log-rank p=0.05).  *eos Disease recurrence or death within 5 years occurred in 108 patients allocated surgery alone and 96 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos 

Of the 279 patients randomised, 217 have died, 114 (81%) of 140 patients allocated surgery alone and 103 (74%) of 139 patients allocated radiotherapy, median survival times are 24 months and 31 months, respectively.  *eos Median follow-up time for the patients who survived is 10 years.  *eos Although less than two thirds of the planned sample size was achieved, 217 (86%) of the 251 deaths anticipated, if the planned 450 patients had been entered and followed up for 3 years, have occurred.  *eos The hazard ratio for death from any cause is 0.79, giving an estimated reduction in the risk of death for patients allocated radiotherapy of 21% (log-rank p=0.10).  *eos However, the 95% CI for this hazard ratio is wide (0.6-1.04) indicating that the data are also compatible with no advantage to radiotherapy (figure 3).  *eos 

We attempted to classify causes of death, taking the principal cause named on the trial death form or the OPCS death certificate.  *eos Necropsy was done rarely and so causes of death should be interpreted with caution.  *eos However, cause-specific survival analysis suggests a larger benefit for radiotherapy.  *eos Fewer deaths were reported to have been from colorectal cancer or complications of the disease or its treatment among patients allocated preoperative radiotherapy than among those allocated surgery alone (85 vs 103, hazard ratio 0.71 [0.54-0.97], p=0.02).  *eos This estimate indicates a substantial decrease in the risk of death from colorectal cancer in patients allocated radiotherapy, although the data are compatible with a halving of the risk of death from colorectal cancer at one extreme or as little as 3% reduction in risk at the other.  *eos 

Discussion. *eos 

The extended follow-up period of the study enabled us to come close to achieving our objectives despite failure to enroll the 450 patients required for the trial design.  *eos The effects of radiotherapy on recurrence of cancer and survival are similar to the estimates on which the trial design was based.  *eos Failure to recruit the planned number of patients is reflected in the wide 95% CI seen for each of the main endpoints.  *eos 

There was evidence of benefit from preoperative radiotherapy before the trial.  *eos The reasons for investigating preoperative radiation therapy were, reduction in size of the primary tumour and frequency of regional node metastases before resection, a reduction in the frequency of local pelvic recurrence and of distant metastasis from cancer cells released during resection (preoperative treatment can inhibit the proliferation of malignant cells whether they remain local or spread outside the pelvis after radiation), radiation responsiveness of cancer cells may be greater before surgery when they are normally oxygenated than afterwards when they may be hypoxic because of surgical effects on the vasculature, and a lower frequency of late radiation enteritis because the small bowel is less likely to be adherent in the pelvis.  *eos 

In line with the earlier trials we found no increased frequency of early or late complications in the patients who received radiotherapy.  *eos There were significant reductions in tumour size and grade and in the rates of local recurrence and distant metastases in the radiotherapy group.  *eos There was a suggestion that the risk of death from colorectal cancer was reduced, and a trend towards an improvement in overall survival.  *eos However, the trial was of sufficient size to detect only substantial improvement in overall survival.  *eos 

The trial was aimed at a specific disease subgroup - patients with locally advanced but otherwise operable rectal cancer (defined in the first MRC trial as fixed or partially fixed).  *eos Patients in this subgroup have a much lower potential for curative surgery as well as a much poorer rate of survival even when curative surgery appeared to have been achieved.  *eos In the earlier trial surgeons were asked only to record their preoperative findings with respect to fixity, but in this trial they were asked to base a crucial decision on type of treatment on these observations.  *eos Patients in the preoperative radiotherapy treatment group, in which a moderately high dose of radiation was to be used, had their surgery delayed by 2 months (1 month to cover the radiotherapy fractionation and a further month for tumour regression to occur and for the normal tissues to recover from the radiation).  *eos Whereas surgeons showed little reluctance to accept the 2 weeks of low-dose radiation of the first trial, especially because there was no requirement for further delay before the operation, they were reluctant to allow their patients to be open to what they saw as the risks of delayed surgical treatment in this trial.  *eos This reluctance may have hindered recruitment to the trial.  *eos Also there was a general misinterpretation of the outcome of the initial trial of low-dose radiotherapy.  *eos In addition, the patients selected for this study represent only a small proportion of total operable cases.  *eos 

The case for preoperative adjuvant radiotherapy has been supported by several trials published since this trial started, including the European trial reported by Gerard and colleagues.  *eos In that study of 466 patients, the survival benefit of 69% in the treated group versus 59% in the surgery-only group also failed to achieve statistical significance (log rank p=0.08).  *eos Several Swedish studies have advanced the case for the use of preoperative rather than postoperative radiation in terms of better patient compliance, greater reduction in local recurrence rates, and lower morbidity.  *eos None of these studies has concentrated specifically on locally advanced tumours.  *eos Pahlman and Glimelius reported evidence that the reduction in volume of tissue irradiated through three portals instead of the two used in this and most other trials, has resulted in reduced postoperative morbidity and mortality.  *eos Moreover, current practice is to give a short course of high-dose radiation (25 Gy over 5.7 days) and to proceed to immediate surgery, thus avoiding the long delay before surgery.  *eos 

Since the trial was closed, surgeons have been entering patients in large numbers into the AXIS trial in which there is randomisation with respect to preoperative radiation for patients with rectal cancer, with the Swedish model of short, high-dose therapy.  *eos The combined evidence from all these trials should yield sufficient numbers to answer precisely the questions of the effect of preoperative radiotherapy on local and distant recurrence, and above all the effect on survival.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
