 Pelvic lymph node metastases, for example have been known to decrease the 5-year survival from 82 to 90% in patients with negative nodes to 38 to 61% in patients with positive lymph nodes. Additional risk factors for recurrence, e.g., large tumor diameter (LTD), deep stromal invasion (DSI), and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces (CLS) found on microscopic examination have been only recently recognized and less extensively investigated than lymph node metastases. An analysis of data on 575 women enrolled in a previous Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) study of clinical and pathologic predictors of surgically treated stage carcinoma of the cervix confirmed the roles of LTD, DSI, and CLS as risk factors, increasing the probability of cancer recurrence at 3 years from 2 to 31%. Furthermore, that study estimated that the proportion of women with such risk factors was 25% of all Stage IB cervical cancer patients with negative lymph nodes.  In 1988 the GOG initiated a prospective randomized study (GOG #92), reported here, to investigate the benefits and risks of adjuvant radiotherapy for Stage I cervical cancer patients treated by conventional radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy and who were at high risk for recurrence, because of LTD, DSI, CLS, but excluding patients with lymph node metastases. The GOG #92 multicenter prospective randomized study was designed to determine whether postoperative pelvic radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy and pelvic node dissection would reduce the rate of recurrence and decrease the mortality in Stage IB cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep stromal invasion by tumor, and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces found on microscopic examination. Patients were eligible for the study if they had primary Stage IB squamous, adenosquamous carcinoma, or adenocarcinoma of cervix initially treated with a standard radical hysterectomy and who had negative lymph nodes but one of the previously described combination of risk factors. There were 128 (46%) patients with the risk factors of positive CLS and deep one-third stromal invasion, 65 (23%) had positive CLS, middle third stromal invasion and tumor size $2 cm, 82 (30%) had negative CLS, middle or deep third stromal invasion and a $4-cm tumor, and 2 (0.7%) had positive CLS, superficial stromal invasion, and tumor size $5 cm (Table 3). There was a disproportionately larger number of patients with positive CLS among the NFT regimen (24% versus 35%) and more patients with .4 cm diameter tumors in the RT regimen (62% versus 54%). The crude estimate in the reduction in risk in patients receiving adjuvant radiotherapy was 47% (i.e., relative risk 5 0.53) with the recurrence-free rate of 88% in the radiotherapy group and 79% in the no-further-therapy group at 2 years (Fig. Of the 3 patients with grade 4 toxicities, 1 patient had a complication involving the urogenital tract, 1 gastrointestinal, and 1 both hematologic and urogenital toxicity. The risk factors used to select patients for this study have been investigated and reported in the literature. A detailed GOG clinical pathologic study had established that certain patients with poor prognostic factors related to the primary tumor (i.e., large tumor size, deep stromal invasion, and capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement) but without lymph node involvement had a risk of recurrence of 31% after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. The present prospective randomized study showed that adjunctive radiotherapy significantly reduced the number of cancer recurrences in women with the above risk factors by 44% and that the difference in recurrences between irradiated and nonirradiated patients was statistically significant at the P 5 0.019 level. The use of adjuvant radiotherapy to improve the outcome in the Stage I cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep invasion, and CLS has been previously proposed. The GOG attempted to conduct a randomized radiotherapy trial for women with positive nodes, but could not complete the study because of failure to enroll a sufficient number of patients (unpublished GOG data).  A significant number of women with Stage IB cervical cancer should benefit from adjuvant pelvic irradiation because 25% of the lymph-node negative patients have high risk factors according to the 1990 GOG data.  Thus, adjunctive radiotherapy is beneficial for Stage I cervical cancer patients with clinicalÿ¿¿¿¿¿pathological risk factors for recurrence other than positive nodes.
