A previous GOG study estimated that women with one of the following combinations of risk factors had, on average, a 31% chance of recurring in 3 years. Women with one of the combinations of risk factors as defined in Table 1 were eligible to enter this study. The study’s target sample size was set at 169 eligible patients based on a desire to detect a 55% decrease in recurrencerate (exponential model with l 5 0.01 recurrences/month) with the use of radiation therapy. In 1993, the sample size goal was increased because of the lower than expected recurrencerate, a better estimate of the change in the recurrence rateover time, and a small, but significant, frequency of noncompliancein the radiation therapy (RT) regimen. The revised sample size goal was 260 patients and the final analysis ofrecurrence-free interval would occur once 60 recurrences were observed. This goal would allow the detection of a 47% reduction in the risk of recurrence with complete compliance or 50% reduction with 8% noncompliance among those registered to the RT regimen. All designs allowed for 80% statistical power when performing a one-tail test at the 0.05 level.

The ureter had to be unroofed from its entry into the broad ligament to its intramural portion in the bladder and dissected laterally from its attachments tothe cardinal ligament. Pelvic lymphadenectomy required bilateral removal of all nodal tissue and skeletonization of all vessels from the mid portion of the psoas muscle to uterermedially including the hypogastric artery and vein and from the obturator fossa anterior to the obturator nerve. Tumor diameter was estimated by palpation. Institutional pathologists measured the depth of stromal tumor invasion with a millimeterruler and made a determination of a presence or absence of CLS. 

Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy was started within 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively. Patients received external beam irradiation and nobrachytherapy. The pelvic irradiation was given with a fourfield technique with a megavoltage beam, although cobalt-60 was allowed if the SSD was greater than 80 cm. Radiation dose was from 46 Gy in 23 fractions to 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions, 5 fractions per week. Treatment breaks for clinical problems (vomiting or diarrhea) were allowed to total no more than 1 week. Intravenous pyelogram, renal sonogram, or computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was to be done at 6 months and then yearly. 

Statistical Methods
The primary outcome variable was recurrence-free interval(RFI). Similarly, survival is defined from date ofstudy entry to death, or date last seen. Sites of recurrence were classified as local if detected in the pelvis or vagina, and distantif detected in extrapelvic locations. Life tables were computed using the method of Kaplan and Meier. The difference in RFI and survival by treatment regimen was evaluated using the log-rank test applying the intent-to-treat principle. One hundred and fifty-one patients (55%) were white, 56 (20%) were black, 27 (10%) were Hispanic, and 21 (8%) were Asian. The site of recurrence was unknown for 2 patients. Fortyfive (78%) of 58 recurrences were local only (vagina or pelvis)(Table 4). Forty-eight patients have died as of this report (final analysis of survival awaits further follow-up until 60 deaths have occurred). Thirty (21%) patients among those in the NFT group died, 25 (18%) from cancer, compared to 18 (13%) deaths inthe RT group, 15 (11%) of whom died from cancer with one attributable to treatment (Table 5). The adverse effects by organ system and treatment group are displayed in Table 6. One patient with severely decreased bladder volume required a permanent Indiana pouch urinary conduit for relief of urinary incontinence. Deep tumor invasion into cervicalstroma (measured either in millimeters or in thirds of the total cervical thickness) has been also shown in association with lymph node metastases, recurrence, and poorer survival. Boyce et al. emphasized that a combination of risk factors correlated better with the survival than one factor alone. In addition, preoperative tumor size cannot be verified for quality control. It should be noted that the 27% recurrence rate at 3 years in our study population is lower than the anticipated one-third. This difference can be explained by an overestimation of risk by the regression model which commonly occurs, this phenomenais sometimes referred to as regression to the mean. Especially vulnerable to adverse radiation effectsare the bladder and the ureters due to compromised circulation from surgical dissection and the intestines because of adhesions and reduced motility. Thus, adjunctive radiotherapy is beneficial for Stage I cervical cancer patients with clinical–pathological risk factors for recurrence other than positive nodes. 
