<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1118</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
INTRODUCTION. *eos Over the past several decades, the prognosis of patients with locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix has been poor, particularly for those with bulky local tumors and extensive parametrial extension.  *eos The treatment of choice for advanced cervical carcinoma has traditionally been radiotherapy alone.  *eos The incidence of failure to control pelvic disease following radical irradiation is about 40%.  *eos This is associated with a high incidence of distant metastasis, in which 30% of patients subsequently developed metastases either alone or in combination with pelvic failure.  *eos While no therapy has been proven more effective than radical external-beam plus intracavitary radiotherapy, considerable research effort, including addition of chemotherapy plus radiation, is currently being put into improving survival rate in patients with advanced carcinoma of the cervix.  *eos The rationale for adding chemotherapy to pelvic radiation is to provide systemic cytotoxic agents active against cervical cancer with the potential to enhance the radiosensitivity, to enhance local tumor control, and to eradicate micrometastasis.  *eos Recently, a variety of studies have investigated how chemotherapy may be integrated into the management of patients with advanced cervical cancer.  *eos The use of concurrent chemoradiotherapy has shown promising therapeutic results in a variety of tumors.  *eos The concurrent use of radiation and chemotherapy, either as a single agent or in combination, has also been demonstrated to be effective in the local control of advanced carcinoma of the cervix with acceptable toxicity as presented by several reports, and was also supported by our previous phase I and II trial.  *eos However, most series were nonrandomized and failed to achieve an improvement in long-term survival.  *eos Therefore, to further test the hypothesis, a definitive statement about the optimal management in this situation required a prospective, randomized trial.  *eos Thus, we designed the randomized trial to compare the tumor response and survival rate of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma receiving concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus patients receiving radiotherapy alone.  *eos The purpose of this randomized trial was to assess whether the chemoradiation is better than radiotherapy alone for locally advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos We also compared the toxicity of the two compared groups after planned treatment. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Trial Design. *eos This study was designed as a randomized, phase III trial conducted at the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Taiwan.  *eos From October 1990 to April 1995, patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered on the study and randomly assigned to either radiotherapy or concurrent chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Before randomization, patients were stratified by stage (stage IIb bulky versus stage IIIB).  *eos The trial compared the efficacy and tolerability of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer.  *eos 

Patients. *eos A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were included in this study.  *eos Patients with previously untreated stage IIb bulky or stage IIIb advanced cervical carcinoma were eligible for study.  *eos Other eligibility criteria consisted of a pathologically verified squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, a Karnofsky performance status index of 80% or above, and an age of younger than 70 years.  *eos Patients with stage IIB tumors had to have bulky tumors larger than 4 cm and extensive parametrial invasion.  *eos The patients could have no history of previous malignancy, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy.  *eos Adequate hepatic, renal, and cardiopulmonary functions were essential.  *eos Informed consents were obtained from all patients, and the study protocol was approved by the Protocol Committee of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital.  *eos The disease was staged according to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) in 1991.  *eos Pretreatment evaluation included a complete medical history and physical examination, complete blood count, serum electrolytes, chemistry profile, tumor markers, chest X ray, an electrocardiogram, and contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis.  *eos All patients had protoscopy, cystoscopy, bone scan, and biopsy of any suspected lesions.  *eos Patients with radiographically suspicious paraaortic lymph nodes underwent a CT-guided percutaneous needle aspiration of the node.  *eos Extraperitoneal staging laparotomy was performed if aspiration cytology was negative.  *eos Any enlarged or suspicious nodes were excised and sent for histopathologic interpretation.  *eos Patients with documented disease beyond the pelvis were excluded, as were patients with positive paraaortic lymph nodes.  *eos 

Treatment Plan. *eos Eligible patients were randomized to receive concurrent chemoradiotherapy or radiation therapy alone.  *eos In the radiation group, patients received external beam X-ray treatment followed by intracavitary brachytherapy.  *eos External beam irradiation was started on Day 1 and delivered using a linear accelerator of 10-MV photons to the whole pelvis using a four-field box technique.  *eos A dose of 4400 cGy was delivered in 22 equal fractions over 30 to 35 days.  *eos This was followed by six courses of intracavitary brachytherapy 1 to 2 weeks after external beam radiotherapy was completed.  *eos Treatment was given using a remote-control afterloading system to give 430 cGy at point A in each intracavitary brachytherapy, as described previously.  *eos In the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group, chemotherapeutic regimens consisted of cisplatin (50 mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously at the rate of 1 mg/min on Day 1), vincristine (1 mg/m2 intravenously push on Day 2), and bleomycin (25 mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously infusion in divided doses on Days 2, 3, and 4) which were given starting on Day 1 of radiotherapy and then every 3 weeks for a total of four courses.  *eos Antiemetic treatment was given before and after cisplatinum-based chemotherapy.  *eos Flexible granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 2 mg/kg/day administration was used to prevent neutropenia and further infection.  *eos The patients had to have a white-cell count of at least 3000/m3 and a platelet count of at least 100,000/m3 before the next course could be administered.  *eos Chemotherapy was to be delayed week by week until the neutrophil count recovered to ú1500/ml, platelet count recovered to ú100,000/ml.  *eos Cisplatin was to be delayed if serum creatinine levels did not return to 1.5 mg/dl, and creatinine clearance to 60 ml/min.  *eos If this delay exceeded 3 weeks, the patient was withdrawn from the study.  *eos The local response to treatment was evaluated at 1 month after completion of therapy by physical examination and abdominopelvic computerized tomography.  *eos Tumor response definitions used were based on World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.  *eos All adverse effects and laboratory abnormalities for chemotherapy were graded according to the toxicity criteria of the Gynecologic Oncology Group.  *eos Toxicity of chemotherapy was assessed before each course.  *eos 

Study End Point. *eos The primary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to tumor response, failure patterns, disease-free interval, and actuarial survival.  *eos The secondary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to treatment-related toxicities, treatment delays, and completeness.  *eos Survival was defined as the observed length of life from protocol entry to death or until January 5, 1997 when the data analysis was finished and patients were still alive.  *eos Disease-relapsed interval was defined as the time from entry to local recurrence or distant metastasis.  *eos 

Statistical Considerations. *eos In the study design, it was assumed that 60 eligible patients would be randomly assigned to each treatment group.  *eos At a two-sided P value of 0.05, with the use of a Pearson x2 approximation, the estimated power was 80% an improvement of 25% in survival with the concurrent therapy at the a Å 0.05 level (two-sided test).  *eos The actuarial disease-free survival and overall survival of patients with complete follow-up were estimated by the life-table method of Kaplan and Meier.  *eos Differences in survival rates were assessed by the log-rank test.  *eos Comparisons of variables between groups were based on the x2 test.  *eos All eligible patients were included in the analysis regardless of whether they completed the assigned treatment. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos The study began in October 1990 and ended in April 1995.  *eos A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered and all were eligible for follow-up evaluation.  *eos Among them, 60 patients were randomized to the concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 62 were randomized to the radiotherapy alone.  *eos The median follow-up was 46.8 months (range, 12 ­ 69 months).  *eos The mean age of the patients was 56.2 years (range, 33 ­ 68 years) in the concurrent group, and 58.7 years (range, 41 ­ 69 years) in the radiotherapy group.  *eos Patient characteristics were well balanced between the compared groups.  *eos Detailed data of the presenting patient characteristics with age, FIGO stage, tumor size, histologic grade, and parametrium status were listed in Table 1.  *eos Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 43 patients completed four courses of chemotherapy, 11 patients received three courses, and 6 patients received two courses of chemotherapy.  *eos Among them, interrupted radiotherapy with delayed treatment because of treatment-related toxicity was observed in 9 cases.  *eos A review of the reasons for these unscheduled interruptions of therapy revealed that 8 were due to hematological toxicity, and 1 was due to elevated GOT and GPT.  *eos The duration of the unplanned interruption was 1 week in 5 and 2 weeks in 2, and 2 patients were unable to complete the planned radiotherapy.  *eos Of the radiotherapy group, 60 patients completed radiotherapy with no delays of treatment for toxicity, whereas the planned radiotherapy was interrupted for 1 week in 2 patients because of radiation protitis or neutropenia.  *eos The duration of therapy for the patients was 59 days (range, 49 ­ 78 days) versus 51 days (range, 47 ­ 65 days) in the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups, respectively.  *eos The incidence of delayed treatment was significantly higher in patients with concurrent chemoradiotherapy than those patients with radiation alone (15.0% versus 3.2%, P Å 0.02).  *eos However, there was no difference in completeness between concurrent group and radiotherapy group (96.7% versus 100%, P = 0.24).  *eos 

Tumor Response Table 2 shows the tumor response for these two groups.  *eos A tumor response was observed in 88.4% (53/60) of the patients in concurrent group and in 74.2% (46/62) of the patient s in radiotherapy group.  *eos The tumor response was significantly higher in patients receiving concurrent chemoradia tion than in pa tients who rece ived radiatio n alone (P = 0.04).  *eos 

Toxicity. *eos Acute (between initiation of therapy to 6 weeks after therapy) and late treatment-related toxicity (6 weeks after therapy) are listed in Tables 3 and 4.  *eos The acute treatment-related toxicity (grade 3 or 4) appears to be higher with the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group when compared with radiation group (36.7% versus 17.7%, P Å 0.02).  *eos Although there was no significant difference between the two compared groups with regard to treatment-related late toxicity (concurrent group 23.3% versus radiation group 12.9%, P = 0.13),a nonsignificant trend toward a higher rate of late toxicity in the chemoradiotherapy group is evident.  *eos All these acute toxicities were successfully treated with conservative management, except one death related to neutropenic sepsis after chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Additionally, there was one death related to late toxicity due to a small bowel obstruction with perforation and following with sepsis after chemoradiotherapy.  *eos No treatment-related deaths occurred in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

Failure Patterns. *eos The failure patterns were evaluated and listed in Table 5.  *eos An analysis of the patterns of failure reveals that the incidence of pelvic failure was equally distributed between the treatment groups (31.7% versus 30.6%, P Å 0.93).  *eos Additionally, there was also no difference in the incidence of distant failure between the chemoradiotherapy group and the radiotherapy group (21.6% versus 29%, P Å 0.47).  *eos The median time to pelvic recurrence was 15 months (range, 7 ­ 19 months), whereas the median time to distant recurrence was 21 months (range, 12 ­ 33 months). *eos 

Survival and Disease-Free. *eos Survival Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 31 patients (51.7%) are alive without evidence of disease, 6 (10%) remain alive with disease, and 21 (35%) died of disease at 7 ­ 48 months.  *eos Regarding patients with treatment incompleteness, those two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course because of treatment-related toxicity were dead of disease at 13 and 16 months.  *eos Of the 9 patients requiring treatment delays, 7 patients (77.8%) died of disease (5) or are alive with disease (2), whereas 18 of the 49 patients (36.7%) who had completed their planned treatment without treatment delays died of disease or are alive with disease.  *eos Of the radiation group, 33 patients (53.2%) are alive without evidence of disease, 7 (11.3%) remain alive with disease, and 22 (35.5%) died of disease at 12 ­ 45 months.  *eos After a median follow-up of 46.8 months, the disease-free survival and actuarial survival rates at 3 years for patients in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group were not statistically different compared with patients in the radiotherapy group (51.7% versus 53.2%, P Å 0.92, and 61.7% versus 64.5%, P Å 0.88, respectively).  *eos Figures 1 and 2 show the 3-year disease-free and overall survival curves for the two groups.  *eos Analysis by Kaplan ­ Meier method showed that the actuarial survival was not statistically different between the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups (mean survival time, 38.1 months versus 41.5 months, P Å 0.27). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos Treatment results using radiation alone in women with locally advanced cervical cancer are unsatisfactory.  *eos These failures may be attributed to large central tumor volumes, parametrial extensions of disease resistant to local therapies, or metastatic disease outside the radiation field.  *eos Several studies have confirmed that bulky cervical cancer and extensive parametrial invasion are indeed poor prognostic features.  *eos Radiation effects are dependent on well-oxygenated tumor cells.  *eos In theory, bulky tumors have significant hypoxic cell populations that are relatively radioresistant.  *eos The problem of enhanced pelvic control cannot be approached simply by increasing radiation doses because of the additional complications produced by conventional radiation.  *eos Thus, advanced carcinoma, such as those observed in our study, having a large hypoxic cell component, may be ineffective if receiving radiotherapy alone.  *eos Therefore, the design of a more efficient treatment modality, such as the addition of chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, with the objective of increasing tumor control and long-term survival for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, is advocated.  *eos To date, cisplatin is one of the most active drugs tested in this tumor.  *eos Cisplatin has been the mainstay of treatment for cervical cancer, consistently showing a 20 ­ 25% response rate.  *eos This drug has also been shown to be a radiosensitizer in vitro and in vivo with documented activity in squamous cell carcinoma.  *eos Moreover, cisplatin combined with vincristine and bleomycin has become more popular, and has been reported to be active in cervical cancer.  *eos Therefore, in an attempt to improve tumor control and survival in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, the treatment efficacy and tolerability of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy using cisplatin-based chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer needs to be explored.  *eos Over the past few years, there have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma who received concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  *eos The concept of concurrent chemoradiotherapy offers a number of theoretical advantages, which produces no delay in the start of definitive radiotherapy, no time gap to induce cross-resistance, and the possibility of eradication of subclinical metastasis.  *eos In addition, the possibility of synergistic action between radiation and chemotherapy may lead to increased tumor cell kill.  *eos The published trials in advanced cervical carcinoma with concurrent chemoradiotherapy, either a single-agent weekly cisplatin or in combination with cisplatin ­ 5-FU or cisplatin ­ bleomycin ­ vincristine, yield tumor response rates of approximately 80%, and 3-year survival rates reached 50 to 60% of patients.  *eos However, most of these results were nonrandomized and were based on a small sample size.  *eos Only a randomized trial, using a single agent of weekly cisplatin in combination with radiotherapy, has shown a significant improvement in local ­ regional control when compared with radiation alone.  *eos A later report of this group confirmed that the addition of cisplatin plus radiotherapy failed to show any significant improvement in long-term survival.  *eos Therefore, to test the hypothesis of concurrent chemoradiotherapy improving the survival rate of advanced cervical cancer, in 1990 we began a phase III randomized trial comparing concurrent chemoradiotherapy versus pelvic radiation alone in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma at our institution.  *eos To further increase the systemic activity and the radiation-enhancing potential of the chemotherapy, we chose cisplatin-based regimens with vincristine and bleomycin in this trial because it had proven high efficacy of local control in our previous phase I and II trials for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos Although the response rate of 88.4%, following concurrent chemoradiotherapy, in our study is very encouraging when compared with 74.3% of the radiotherapy group at the end of therapy, this study does not provide evidence that chemoradiation is better than radiotherapy alone with respect to survival.  *eos Our results indicated that, despite the excellent early tumor response seen during treatment, the benefit of concurrent chemoradiation in terms of reduced mortality and increased pelvic control rates may not be as great as that suggested by other reports.  *eos Our study also revealed that the patterns of recurrences were not changed by the concomitant therapy with chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  *eos The pelvis is still the predominant site of failure in around 30%.  *eos However, a high proportion of patients who failed in this trial had a component of distant failure.  *eos Computerized tomography lacks sensitivity for identifying micrometastasis outside the pelvic radiation therapy field.  *eos This finding has been associated with occult extrapelvic disease.  *eos There appears to be a small decrease in distant relapse among the concurrent chemoradiation group, although the difference was not significant.  *eos The most likely explanation for the poor results in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group is the higher treatmentrelated toxicity, and that could limit the dose of definitive radiation employed or interrupt the planned radiotherapy.  *eos An equally likely explanation is the negative impact of prolonged treatment time caused by toxicity-induced delays.  *eos Indeed, in our trial, the treatment-related toxicity was severe and resulted in delayed radiotherapy in 15% of patients after chemoradiotherapy, in which 77.8% of patients with treatment delays recurred or died of disease.  *eos Additionally, the two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course died of disease.  *eos The incidence of acute and late complications encountered in our series was higher than anticipated.  *eos In our trial, grade 3 or 4 treatment-related toxicities were observed more often on chemoradiotherapy than radiotherapy alone.  *eos Moreover, two patients died of septicemia following chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Our results demonstrated that multiagent chemoradiotherapy, concurrently administrated with radiation to improve tumor response, can also produce serious acute and late toxicities, and life-threatening complications.  *eos On the other hand, a probable explanation for the poor survival in advanced cervical cancer patients, in spite of a satisfactory rate of initial response, may be the enhancement of accelerated tumor proliferation during treatment.  *eos Some authors have reported that clonogen repopulation in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region accelerates after radiotherapy.  *eos Chemotherapy could also lead to an accelerated regrowth of surviving clonogens.  *eos The accelerated repopulation in the treatment may involve only a small number of surviving cells, which could be omitted by posttreatment investigations.  *eos Thus, tumor masses would be still regressing while the subclinical clonogenic cell repopulation in accelerating.  *eos Therefore, in patients with locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix, improvement in local control will not translate into an improved long-term outcome because this gain will be offset by the eventual development of a relapse.  *eos In conclusion, when comparing patients with concurrent therapy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy to radiotherapy alone, our study showed that concurrent multiagent chemoradiotherapy did not prove to be a superior definitive therapy for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos It may be that the multiagent chemotherapy with these drugs, dose, and schedule used in this study is too toxic to use with concomitant radiation therapy.  *eos It is desirable for future studies to see whether other chemotherapeutic regiments such as 5-FU or weekly cisplatin would be more likely to be tolerable and be associated with fewer treatment interruptions.  *eos Such trials are currently underway. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
