The treatment of choice for advanced cervical carcinoma has traditionally been radiotherapy alone. We also compared the toxicity of the two compared groups after planned treatment.


Trial Design 
From October 1990 to April 1995, patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered on the study and randomly assigned to either radiotherapy or concurrent chemoradiotherapy. The trial compared the efficacy and tolerability of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer. 

Patients 
A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were included in this study. Patients with previously untreated stage IIb bulky or stage IIIb advanced cervical carcinoma were eligible for study. Patients with stage IIB tumors had to have bulky tumors larger than 4 cm and extensive parametrial invasion. The patients could have no history of previous malignancy, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy. Patients with documented disease beyond the pelvis were excluded, as were patients with positive paraaortic lymph nodes. 

Treatment Plan 
Eligible patients were randomized to receive concurrent chemoradiotherapy or radiation therapy alone. In the radiation group, patients received external beam X-ray treatment followed by intracavitary brachytherapy. Study End Point 
The primary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to tumor response, failure patterns, disease-free interval, and actuarial survival. The secondary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to treatment-related toxicities, treatment delays, and completeness. RESULTS

Among them, 60 patients were randomized to the concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 62 were randomized to the radiotherapy alone. The mean age of the patients was 56.2 years (range, 33 ­ 68 years) in the concurrent group, and 58.7 years (range, 41 ­ 69 years) in the radiotherapy group. Patient characteristics were well balanced between the compared groups. Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 43 patients completed four courses of chemotherapy, 11 patients received three courses, and 6 patients received two courses of chemotherapy. Among them, interrupted radiotherapy with delayed treatment because of treatment-related toxicity was observed in 9 cases. Of the radiotherapy group, 60 patients completed radiotherapy with no delays of treatment for toxicity, whereas the planned radiotherapy was interrupted for 1 week in 2 patients because of radiation protitis or neutropenia. The duration of therapy for the patients was 59 days (range, 49 ­ 78 days) versus 51 days (range, 47 ­ 65 days) in the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups, respectively. The incidence of delayed treatment was significantly higher in patients with concurrent chemoradiotherapy than those patients with radiation alone (15.0% versus 3.2%, P Å 0.02). However, there was no difference in completeness between concurrent group and radiotherapy group (96.7% versus 100%, P = 0.24). 

Tumor Response Table 2 shows the tumor response for these two groups. A tumor response was observed in 88.4% (53/60) of the patients in concurrent group and in 74.2% (46/62) of the patient s in radiotherapy group. Toxicity 

The acute treatment-related toxicity (grade 3 or 4) appears to be higher with the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group when compared with radiation group (36.7% versus 17.7%, P Å 0.02). No treatment-related deaths occurred in the radiotherapy group. 

Failure Patterns 
Survival and Disease-Free 
Survival Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 31 patients (51.7%) are alive without evidence of disease, 6 (10%) remain alive with disease, and 21 (35%) died of disease at 7 ­ 48 months. Regarding patients with treatment incompleteness, those two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course because of treatment-related toxicity were dead of disease at 13 and 16 months. Of the 9 patients requiring treatment delays, 7 patients (77.8%) died of disease (5) or are alive with disease (2), whereas 18 of the 49 patients (36.7%) who had completed their planned treatment without treatment delays died of disease or are alive with disease. Of the radiation group, 33 patients (53.2%) are alive without evidence of disease, 7 (11.3%) remain alive with disease, and 22 (35.5%) died of disease at 12 ­ 45 months. After a median follow-up of 46.8 months, the disease-free survival and actuarial survival rates at 3 years for patients in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group were not statistically different compared with patients in the radiotherapy group (51.7% versus 53.2%, P Å 0.92; and 61.7% versus 64.5%, P Å 0.88, respectively). Treatment results using radiation alone in women with locally advanced cervical cancer are unsatisfactory. Radiation effects are dependent on well-oxygenated tumor cells. Over the past few years, there have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma who received concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The published trials in advanced cervical carcinoma with concurrent chemoradiotherapy, either a single-agent weekly cisplatin or in combination with cisplatin ­ 5-FU or cisplatin ­ bleomycin ­ vincristine, yield tumor response rates of approximately 80%, and 3-year survival rates reached 50 to 60% of patients. In our trial, grade 3 or 4 treatment-related toxicities were observed more often on chemoradiotherapy than radiotherapy alone. Moreover, two patients died of septicemia following chemoradiotherapy. In conclusion, when comparing patients with concurrent therapy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy to radiotherapy alone, our study showed that concurrent multiagent chemoradiotherapy did not prove to be a superior definitive therapy for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma. 

