Over the past several decades the prognosis of patients with locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix has been poor particularly for those with bulky local tumors and extensive parametrial extension. The treatment of choice for advanced cervical carcinoma has traditionally been radiotherapy alone. The incidence of failure to control pelvic disease following radical irradiation is about 40. This is associated with a high incidence of distant metastasis in which 30 of patients subsequently developed metastases either alone or in combination with pelvic failure. The rationale for adding chemotherapy to pelvic radiation is to provide systemic cytotoxic agents active against cervical cancer with the potential to enhance the radiosensitivity to enhance local tumor control and to eradicate micrometastasis. We also compared the toxicity of the two compared groups after planned treatment. MATERIALS AND METHODS. Trial Design. Toxicity of chemotherapy was assessed before each course. The primary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to tumor response failure patterns disease-free interval and actuarial survival. Disease-relapsed interval was defined as the time from entry to local recurrence or distant metastasis. At a two-sided P value of 0.05 with the use of a Pearson x2 approximation the estimated power was 80 an improvement of 25 in survival with the concurrent therapy at the a 0.05 level two-sided test. Differences in survival rates were assessed by the log-rank test. Comparisons of variables between groups were based on the x2 test. Detailed data of the presenting patient characteristics with age FIGO stage tumor size histologic grade and parametrium status were listed in Table 1. Of the chemoradiotherapy group 43 patients completed four courses of chemotherapy 11 patients received three courses and 6 patients received two courses of chemotherapy. The tumor response was significantly higher in patients receiving concurrent chemoradia tion than in pa tients who rece ived radiatio n alone P 0.04. Although there was no significant difference between the two compared groups with regard to treatment-related late toxicity concurrent group 23.3 versus radiation group 12.9 P 0.13a nonsignificant trend toward a higher rate of late toxicity in the chemoradiotherapy group is evident. All these acute toxicities were successfully treated with conservative management except one death related to neutropenic sepsis after chemoradiotherapy. An analysis of the patterns of failure reveals that the incidence of pelvic failure was equally distributed between the treatment groups 31.7 versus 30.6 P 0.93. Additionally there was also no difference in the incidence of distant failure between the chemoradiotherapy group and the radiotherapy group 21.6 versus 29 P 0.47. Survival and Disease-Free. Survival Of the chemoradiotherapy group 31 patients 51.7 are alive without evidence of disease 6 10 remain alive with disease and 21 35 died of disease at 7 48 months. Regarding patients with treatment incompleteness those two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course because of treatment-related toxicity were dead of disease at 13 and 16 months. Of the 9 patients requiring treatment delays 7 patients 77.8 died of disease 5 or are alive with disease 2 whereas 18 of the 49 patients 36.7 who had completed their planned treatment without treatment delays died of disease or are alive with disease. After a median follow-up of 46.8 months the disease-free survival and actuarial survival rates at 3 years for patients in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group were not statistically different compared with patients in the radiotherapy group 51.7 versus 53.2 P 0.92 and 61.7 versus 64.5 P 0.88 respectively. The published trials in advanced cervical carcinoma with concurrent chemoradiotherapy either a single-agent weekly cisplatin or in combination with cisplatin 5-FU or cisplatin bleomycin vincristine yield tumor response rates of approximately 80 and 3-year survival rates reached 50 to 60 of patients. There appears to be a small decrease in distant relapse among the concurrent chemoradiation group although the difference was not significant.

