The treatment of choice for advanced cervical carcinoma has traditionally been radiotherapy alone. Thus, we designed the randomized trial to compare the tumor response and survival rate of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma receiving concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus patients receiving radiotherapy alone. From October 1990 to April 1995, patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered on the study and randomly assigned to either radiotherapy or concurrent chemoradiotherapy. The trial compared the efficacy and tolerability of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer. 

Patients 

A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were included in this study. Patients with previously untreated stage IIb bulky or stage IIIb advanced cervical carcinoma were eligible for study. Patients with stage IIB tumors had to have bulky tumors larger than 4 cm and extensive parametrial invasion. The patients could have no history of previous malignancy, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy. Patients with documented disease beyond the pelvis were excluded, as were patients with positive paraaortic lymph nodes. 


Treatment Plan 

Eligible patients were randomized to receive concurrent chemoradiotherapy or radiation therapy alone. In the radiation group, patients received external beam X-ray treatment followed by intracavitary brachytherapy. Among them, 60 patients were randomized to the concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 62 were randomized to the radiotherapy alone. Patient characteristics were well balanced between the compared groups. Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 43 patients completed four courses of chemotherapy, 11 patients received three courses, and 6 patients received two courses of chemotherapy. Of the radiotherapy group, 60 patients completed radiotherapy with no delays of treatment for toxicity, whereas the planned radiotherapy was interrupted for 1 week in 2 patients because of radiation protitis or neutropenia. The incidence of delayed treatment was significantly higher in patients with concurrent chemoradiotherapy than those patients with radiation alone (15.0% versus 3.2%, P Å 0.02). A tumor response was observed in 88.4% (53/60) of the patients in concurrent group and in 74.2% (46/62) of the patient s in radiotherapy group. Regarding patients with treatment incompleteness, those two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course because of treatment-related toxicity were dead of disease at 13 and 16 months. Of the 9 patients requiring treatment delays, 7 patients (77.8%) died of disease (5) or are alive with disease (2), whereas 18 of the 49 patients (36.7%) who had completed their planned treatment without treatment delays died of disease or are alive with disease. Therefore, the design of a more efficient treatment modality, such as the addition of chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, with the objective of increasing tumor control and long-term survival for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, is advocated. Therefore, in an attempt to improve tumor control and survival in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, the treatment efficacy and tolerability of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy using cisplatin-based chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer needs to be explored. Over the past few years, there have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma who received concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Therefore, to test the hypothesis of concurrent chemoradiotherapy improving the survival rate of advanced cervical cancer, in 1990 we began a phase III randomized trial comparing concurrent chemoradiotherapy versus pelvic radiation alone in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma at our institution. Indeed, in our trial, the treatment-related toxicity was severe and resulted in delayed radiotherapy in 15% of patients after chemoradiotherapy, in which 77.8% of patients with treatment delays recurred or died of disease. Moreover, two patients died of septicemia following chemoradiotherapy. In conclusion, when comparing patients with concurrent therapy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy to radiotherapy alone, our study showed that concurrent multiagent chemoradiotherapy did not prove to be a superior definitive therapy for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma. 
