

Fifty-four patients with advanced breast cancer who had failed prior nonanthracycline combination
chemotherapy were randomized to treatment with either epirubicin 85 mg/m2 or doxorubicin 60 mg/m2
intravenously every three weeks. 


The median cumulative dose at which congestive heart failure occurred was 1,134 mg/m2 of epirubicin
compared with 492 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. 


In retrospective studies, the incidence of symptomatic congestive heart failure (CHF) was estimated
to be approximately 3% to 4% after a cumulative DOX dose of 450 mg/m2 and 6% to 10% after 550 mg/m2,
the incidence of CHF rises steeply after higher cumulative doses.On the basis of these retrospective
studies, an empiric dose limitation of 450 to 550 mg/m2 has been recommended when DOX is used on a
standard every three week schedule.


The two compounds have similar pharmacokinetic behavior in humans, although EPI is eliminated more
rapidly.


We used multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography (RNCA) to assess cardiac toxicity in this
prospective, randomized study comparing the efficacy, acute, and chronic toxicities of EPI with DOX
in patients with advanced breast cancer.


Other criteria for eligibility included a performance status of - 50% (Karnofsky scale), a WBC count
- 4,000/14L, a platelet count >- 100,000/L, normal serum bilirubin levels ( < 1.5 mg/dL), and
objectively evaluable or measurable disease. 


Pretreatment Evaluation and Follow-up Studies Pretreatment evaluation of patients included complete
history and physical examination, complete blood cell count (CBC), 12-channel biochemical profile,
serum creatinine, chest roentgenogram, ECG, and bone scan. All evaluable or measurable parameters of
disease were reevaluated at least every six weeks.


Patients were stratified for performance status (Karnofsky scale < 70% v > 80%) and for estrogen
receptor status of the primary or a metastatic lesion (positive or unknown v negative). 
Randomization was performed using the method of random permuted blocks, which assured an equal
number of patients in each arm at specified time points. 


Both EPI and DOX were administered by slow (five minute) injections through an established IV line
every three weeks. 


Evaluation of ResponseThe criteria for evaluation of therapeutic response were based on the
recommendations of the Breast Cancer Task Force of the National Cancer Institute (Bethesda, Md).17
These guidelines were modified to include a minor response (MR) category for those patients with
unequivocal therapeutic responses, but less than that required for a partial response (PR). Any
patient who developed progressive disease within three months of starting therapy was considered to
have progressed even if she had demonstrated transient tumor regression. 


Statistical MethodsComparison of response rates between the two arms was made using a chi-square
test. Several other comparisons, such as percent of projected dose, used the two-sample Wilcoxon
test.  


Although all patients had received prior chemotherapy which included cyclophosphamide or other
alkylating agent, no patient had been previously treated with mitomycin C. 


The inevaluable patient randomized to treatment with DOX refused to return for follow-up counts or
further therapy, but was alive four months after her only dose of DOX, the patient is also excluded
from analysis of hematologic toxicity.


In addition, on the EPI arm, one patient experienced an MR and eight patients had stable disease. 


Noncardiac ToxicityHematologic toxicity was similar in the two arms (Table 3). 


Because all patients had been treated previously with chemotherapy, the degree and incidence of
alopecia is difficult to assess, however, hair loss was noted in 50% of patients treated with EPI
and 35% of those treated with DOX. 


Of the 18 evaluable patients treated with DOX, seven had prior radiation exposure to the heart, two
had hypertension, and two had both hypertension and prior radiotherapy. Of the ten remaining
patients on the EPI arm and elevenpatients on the DOX arm who are not evaluable for laboratory
cardiac toxicity because they did not have a second RNCA study, the total cumulative doses of EPI
and DOX were not significantly different, whether or not myelosuppressiveequivalent doses were taken
into consideration. 


Nor did all patients experience a steady progressive decline in LVEF, most maintained a stable LVEF
until there was an acute decrease. 


Six of 11 patients who received more than 450 mg/m 2 of DOX did not develop signs or symptoms of
CHF. Of the patients who developed symptomatic CHF on the EPI arm, one had prior radiotherapy and
one had hypertension. 


There was a statistically significant greater cumulative dose to CHF for patients receiving EPI (log
rank test, P - .008) with and without adjustment for the difference in myelosuppressive potency. 


DISCUSSIONIn this study, EPI had therapeutic activity in breast cancer similar to DOX, but produced
less cardiotoxicity than the parent compound. 


Thirteen percent of patients in another recent study developed CHF at a median dose of 405 mg/m 2
when DOX was given on an every three week schedule. 22 With optimal monitoring, one might be able to
detect subclinical cardiac injury and prevent CHF by stopping the drug, this implies, however, the
interruption of effective antineoplastic therapy. The use of potentially cardioprotective agents
such as vitamin E, N-acetylcysteine, and ICRF-187 has been suggested, but the data have not been
sufficiently promising to warrant large scale clinical trials. 


In nonrandomized trials, the use of a weekly DOX schedule has been reported to permit administration
of a higher total dose of the drug. 


The observed major therapeutic response rate to EPI (25%) was identical to that observed with DOX
(25%). 


The therapeutic index of an agent is defined by the relationship between the dosage required to
produce therapeutic and toxic effects and by the magnitude of the favorable or unfavorable effects
observed. Although these results could have been affected by the greater incidence of cardiac
irradiation inpatients treated with DOX, only three patients who had received such radiotherapy
actually developed CHF, one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm.


Whether these findings reflect an improvement in therapeutic index is dependent on the two drugs'
dose relationship for therapeutic effects. In the murine tumor model systems, equal doses of EPI and
DOX produce equal therapeutic effects with less host toxicity in the EPI-treated mice, but a
clinical assessment can only be based on studies in humans. In each study, the partial response
rates of the EPI and DOX arms were equivalent. In the present study, each drug was given every three
weeks in doses that produced equivalent degrees of myelosuppression, a preplanned limitation on the
total cumulative dose of EPI was not used. Since the present study did not use a fixed limitation
for dose of EPI, patients who did not have progression of tumor were treated to the point of
laboratory cardiotoxicity or clinical CHF, therefore, this study provides cumulative cardiotoxicity
data that are not available in the other two studies. 


Although the numbers are small, in the Milan study three of five patients treated with DOX in whom
RNCA was performed showed a decrease in LVEF of more than 10% (375, 450, and 525 mg/m2). 


Most patients in our trials received less than 550 mg/m2 of EPI, however, in 11 patients receiving
cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1,465 mg/m2, RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients
at 970, 1,180,1,190, and 1,465 mg/m2, respectively (C.W. 


Assuming equal therapeutic potency, this analysis indicated that every three week EPI is less
cardiotoxic than every three week DOX (P = .0005) and borderline less toxic than weekly DOX (P =
.06). The sudden onset of clinical deterioration was also reported byBristow who considered this a
manifestation of a nonlinear relationship between myocardial structure and function.3 6 Likewise,
changes in LVEF in response to stress frequently accompanied a decline in LVEF, but we did not
observe such a decline without a concommittant change in resting LVEF. 
