Fifty-four patients with advanced breast cancer who had failed prior nonanthracycline combination chemotherapy were randomized to treatment with either epirubicin 85 mg/m2 or doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 intravenously every three weeks. Of 52 evaluable patients 25 six of 24 treated with epirubicin and 25 seven of 28 treated with doxorubicin experienced major therapeutic responses. The median duration of response to epirubicin was 11.9 months compared to 7.1 months with doxorubicin. Laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity was defined as a decrease in resting left ventricular ejection fraction of 10 from the baseline value or a decrease of 5 or greater with exercise compared with the resting study performed on the same day. Fifteen patients treated with epirubicin and 18 patients treated with doxorubicin had at least two determinations of left ventricular ejection fraction and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity. Using methods of survival analysis the median doses to the development of laboratory cardiotoxicity were estimated to be 935 mg/m2 of epirubicin and 468 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. Four patients treated with epirubicin and five treated with doxorubicin developed symptomatic congestive heart failure. The median cumulative dose at which congestive heart failure occurred was 1134 mg/m2 of epirubicin compared with 492 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. Epirubicin is a new anthracycline with reduced cardiac toxicity but preserved efficacy in the treatment of patients with advanced breast cancer. The antitumor activity of EPI in animal models is similar to that of DOX but EPI is a less toxic compound with regard to both cytotoxicity and cardiac injury. We used multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography RNCA to assess cardiac toxicity in this prospective randomized study comparing the efficacy acute and chronic toxicities of EPI with DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer. Evaluation of Toxicity The percent of projected dose received was calculated for each patient as the average of all doses the patient received mg/m 2 - 85 if the patient was randomized to EPI and - 60 if the patient was randomized to DOX. In the case of DOX at a cumulative dose of 50 mg/m2 patients were offered the option to discontinue therapy or to continue with close monitoring of cardiac function with RNCA. No such dose limitation was imposed for patients on the EPI arm as the toxic cumulative dose of EPI was not established at the onset of this study. Eight patients on the EPI arm and 14 on the DOX arm had received prior radiotherapy to the chest mediastinum or thoracic spine that may have exposed the myocardium to ionizing radiation. The median actual dose administered was 100 of the projected dose of EPI and 86 of the planned dose of DOX Wilcoxon test P .01. Response Rates and Durations Twenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28 patients on the DOX arm are evaluable for therapeutic response Table 2. The additional patient randomized to EPI died with progressive breast cancer and nadir sepsis 15 days after her first dose of EPI she is excluded from analysis of therapeutic results but is included in the analysis of hematologic toxicity. The inevaluable patient randomized to treatment with DOX refused to return for follow-up counts or further therapy but was alive four months after her only dose of DOX the patient is also excluded from analysis of hematologic toxicity. Six 25 of the 24 evaluable patients treated with EPI and seven 25 of the 28 evaluable patients on the DOX arm achieved PRs. Cardiac toxicity alone did not limit the administration of EPI but DOX was discontinued in three patients with ongoing PRs because of cardiac toxicity. There was no difference log rank test P .90 in the median time to progression between the patients on the EPI arm 3.9 months and those on the DOX arm 5.1 months. Nausea or vomiting was documented in 58 of patients who received EPI and 67 of the patients who were treated with DOX. Because all patients had been treated previously with chemotherapy the degree and incidence of alopecia is difficult to assess however hair loss was noted in 50 of patients treated with EPI and 35 of those treated with DOX. Mucositis was observed in only 4 of patients on the EPI arm and in 6 of patients receiving DOX. Fifteen patients on the EPI arm and 18 patients on the DOX arm had at least one followup RNCA and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity. Eight patients treated with EPI and nine patients treated with DOX had laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity. The median cumulative dose to laboratory cardiotoxicity in these patients was 892 mg/m2 of EPI and 360 mg/m 2 of DOX. The median dose to development of cardiotoxicity for all evaluable patients was 935 mg/m2 for EPI and 468 mg/m2 for DOX Fig 2A. Four patients treated with EPI and five patients treated with DOX developed clinical congestive heart failure CHF. The cumulative doses of EPI at which clinical CHF was observed 1035 1105 1162 and 1234 mg/m 2 were approximately twice the cumulative doses of DOX at which CHF was seen 456 480 492 560 and 600 mg/m2. One of the patients who developed CHF on the DOX arm is the patient who had the initial resting LVEF of 48 this patient also had a history of pulmonary emboli and it was unclear whether this contributed to her cardiac decompensation. Among patients who experienced clinical CHF however the median cumulative doses to CHF were 1134 mg/m2 of EPI and 492 mg/m 2 of DOX. The difference in cardiac toxicity was manifested by the difference in total cumulative dose at which changes in LVEF occurred Fig 2A as well as by the difference in dose at which clinical CHF was seen EPI 1035 to 1234 mg/m 2 v DOX 456 to 600 mg/m2. Although these results could have been affected by the greater incidence of cardiac irradiation in patients treated with DOX only three patients who had received such radiotherapy actually developed CHF one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm. In the murine tumor model systems equal doses of EPI and DOX produce equal therapeutic effects with less host toxicity in the EPI-treated mice but a clinical assessment can only be based on studies in humans. Since the present study did not use a fixed limitation for dose of EPI patients who did not have progression of tumor were treated to the point of laboratory cardiotoxicity or clinical CHF therefore this study provides cumulative cardiotoxicity data that are not available in the other two studies. Most patients in our trials received less than 550 mg/m2 of EPI however in 11 patients receiving cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1465 mg/m2 RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients at 970 11801190 and 1465 mg/m2 respectively C.W. Our results show that EPI has therapeutic activity that is similar to that of DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer and that EPI is a less cardiotoxic drug than DOX even accounting for the difference in myelosuppressive potency. In this study worsening cardiac function forced the premature discontinuation of DOX therapy in three patients experiencing partial responses whereas effective treatment with EPI was never discontinued because of cardiac toxicity. 
