 We used multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography (RNCA) to assess cardiac toxicity in this prospective, randomized study comparing the efficacy, acute, and chronic toxicities of EPI with DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer.  MATERIALS AND METHODS Patient Eligibility This study was conducted in patients with advanced breast cancer who had progressed after receiving combination chemotherapy.  Evaluation of Toxicity The percent of projected dose received was calculated for each patient as the average of all doses the patient received (mg/m 2) - 85 if the patient was randomized to EPI and - 60 if the patient was randomized to DOX. No such dose limitation was imposed for patients on the EPI arm, as the toxic cumulative dose of EPI was not established at the onset of this study. Eight patients on the EPI arm and 14 on the DOX arm had received prior radiotherapy to the chest, mediastinum, or thoracic spine that may have exposed the myocardium to ionizing radiation. Although all patients had received prior chemotherapy which included cyclophosphamide or other alkylating agent, no patient had been previously treated with mitomycin C.  Response Rates and Durations Twenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28 patients on the DOX arm are evaluable for therapeutic response (Table 2). The additional patient randomized to EPI died with progressive breast cancer and nadir sepsis 15 days after her first dose of EPI; The inevaluable patient randomized to treatment with DOX refused to return for follow-up counts or further therapy, but was alive four months after her only dose of DOX; Six (25%) of the 24 evaluable patients treated with EPI and seven (25%) of the 28 evaluable patients on the DOX arm achieved PRs. In addition, on the EPI arm, one patient experienced an MR and eight patients had stable disease. Cardiac toxicity alone did not limit the administration of EPI, but DOX was discontinued in three patients with ongoing PRs because of cardiac toxicity. There was no difference (log rank test, P = .90) in the median time to progression between the patients on the EPI arm (3.9 months) and those on the DOX arm (5.1 months). Nausea or vomiting was documented in 58% of patients who received EPI and 67% of the patients who were treated with DOX. Mucositis was observed in only 4% of patients on the EPI arm, and in 6% of patients receiving DOX.  Cardiac Toxicity Each patient had a baseline RNCA scan, and in all patients the resting LVEF was > 50% with the exception of one patient in whom it was 48%. Fifteen patients on the EPI arm and 18 patients on the DOX arm had at least one followup RNCA and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity. Eight patients treated with EPI and nine patients treated with DOX had laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity. The median cumulative dose to laboratory cardiotoxicity in these patients was 892 mg/m2 of EPI and 360 mg/m 2 of DOX. The median dose to development of cardiotoxicity for all evaluable patients was 935 mg/m2 for EPI and 468 mg/m2 for DOX (Fig 2A). Of the ten remaining patients on the EPI arm and eleven patients on the DOX arm who are not evaluable for laboratory cardiac toxicity because they did not have a second RNCA study, the total cumulative doses of EPI and DOX were not significantly different, whether or not myelosuppressiveequivalent doses were taken into consideration.  Four patients treated with EPI and five patients treated with DOX developed clinical congestive heart failure (CHF). One of the patients who developed CHF on the DOX arm is the patient who had the initial resting LVEF of 48%; Since only five patients treated with DOX and four treated with EPI actually developed clinical heart failure, this result should not be overinterpreted. Among patients who experienced clinical CHF, however, the median cumulative doses to CHF were 1,134 mg/m2 of EPI and 492 mg/m 2 of DOX. In a prospective adjuvant chemotherapy trial for patients with soft-tissue sarcomas, 14% of patients who received 430 to 600 mg/m2 of DOX developed clinical CHF. Thirteen percent of patients in another recent study developed CHF at a median dose of 405 mg/m 2 when DOX was given on an every three week schedule. The difference in cardiac toxicity was manifested by the difference in total cumulative dose at which changes in LVEF occurred (Fig 2A), as well as by the difference in dose at which clinical CHF was seen (EPI, 1,035 to 1,234 mg/m 2 v DOX, 456 to 600 mg/m2). Although these results could have been affected by the greater incidence of cardiac irradiation in patients treated with DOX, only three patients who had received such radiotherapy actually developed CHF, one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm. Since the present study did not use a fixed limitation for dose of EPI, patients who did not have progression of tumor were treated to the point of laboratory cardiotoxicity or clinical CHF; At cumulative EPI doses of 600 to 700 mg/m2, two (13%) of the 15 evaluable patients at risk for RNCA changes developed a decrease in LVEF of > 10%. however, in 11 patients receiving cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1,465 mg/m2, RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients at 970, 1,180,1,190, and 1,465 mg/m2, respectively (C.W.  Our results show that EPI has therapeutic activity that is similar to that of DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer, and that EPI is a less cardiotoxic drug than DOX, even accounting for the difference in myelosuppressive potency. In this study, worsening cardiac function forced the premature discontinuation of DOX therapy in three patients experiencing partial responses, whereas effective treatment with EPI was never discontinued because of cardiac toxicity.
