Four patients treated with epirubicin and five treated with doxorubicin developed symptomatic congestive heart failure. Epirubicin (4'-epi-doxorubicin, EPI) is one such compound. Therapeutic responses were observed in patients with advanced breast cancer in both studies. We used multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography (RNCA) to assess cardiac toxicity in this prospective, randomized study comparing the efficacy, acute, and chronic toxicities of EPI with DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer.

Patient Eligibility
Patients whose prior treatment included an anthracycline were excluded from this study. Study Design
All patients were then randomly assigned to receive either EPI or DOX. The dose of EPI was 85 mg/m2, and the dose of DOX was 60 mg/m2. The percent of projected dose received was calculated for each patient as the average of all doses the patient received (mg/m 2) - 85 if the patient was randomized to EPI and - 60 if the patient was randomized to DOX. Cardiac toxicity was assessed in all patients by both clinical evaluation and RNCA. Antineoplastic therapy was discontinued if the LVEF decreased to < 40% or if the patient developed clinical congestive heart failure. Patient Characteristics
A total of 54 women were randomized, 25 to the EPI arm and 29 to the DOX arm. Dose Attenuation
The percent of projected dose received by patients in each arm was compared. Doses were reduced more frequently on the DOX arm as compared to the EPI arm, in which two patients' doses were escalated. The median actual dose administered was 100% of the projected dose of EPI and 86% of the planned dose of DOX (Wilcoxon test, P = .01).

Twenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28 patients on the DOX arm are evaluable for therapeutic response (Table 2). Six (25%) of the 24 evaluable patients treated with EPI and seven (25%) of the 28 evaluable patients on the DOX arm achieved PRs. In addition, on the EPI arm, one patient experienced an MR and eight patients had stable disease. The median duration of PR for patients responding to EPI was 11.9 months, whereas median duration of PR on the DOX arm was 7.1 months. Cardiac toxicity alone did not limit the administration of EPI, but DOX was discontinued in three patients with ongoing PRs because of cardiac toxicity. One patient receiving EPI died of nadir sepsis. Nausea or vomiting was documented in 58% of patients who received EPI and 67% of the patients who were treated with DOX. Mucositis was observed in only 4% of patients on the EPI arm, and in 6% of patients receiving DOX.

Cardiac Toxicity
Each patient had a baseline RNCA scan, and in all patients the resting LVEF was > 50% with the exception of one patient in whom it was 48%. All patients are included in the analysis of cardiotoxicity. Fifteen patients on the EPI arm and 18 patients on the DOX arm had at least one followup RNCA and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity. Eight patients treated with EPI and nine patients treated with DOX had laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity. The median cumulative dose to laboratory cardiotoxicity in these patients was 892 mg/m2 of EPI and 360 mg/m 2 of DOX. The median dose to development of cardiotoxicity for all evaluable patients was 935 mg/m2 for EPI and 468 mg/m2 for DOX (Fig 2A). Overall, 100% of the planned dose of EPI (85 mg/m2) was administered; however, only 86% (52 mg/m2) of the planned dose of DOX was given. Of the ten remaining patients on the EPI arm and eleven
patients on the DOX arm who are not evaluable for laboratory cardiac toxicity because they did not have a second RNCA study, the total cumulative doses of EPI and DOX were not significantly different, whether or not myelosuppressiveequivalent doses were taken into consideration. Four patients treated with EPI and five patients treated with DOX developed clinical congestive heart failure (CHF). The cumulative doses of EPI at which clinical CHF was observed (1,035, 1,105, 1,162, and 1,234 mg/m 2) were approximately twice the cumulative doses of DOX at which CHF was seen (456, 480, 492, 560, and 600 mg/m2). Survival analysis methods were also applied to compare the cumulative doses to clinical CHF for patients in the two arms. Since only five patients treated with DOX and four treated with EPI actually developed clinical heart failure, this result should not be overinterpreted. Among patients who experienced clinical CHF, however, the median cumulative doses to CHF were 1,134 mg/m2 of EPI and 492 mg/m 2 of DOX.

In a prospective adjuvant chemotherapy trial for patients with soft-tissue sarcomas, 14% of patients who received 430 to 600 mg/m2 of DOX developed clinical CHF. Thirteen percent of patients in another recent study developed CHF at a median dose of 405 mg/m 2 when DOX was given on an every three week schedule. Structurally, EPI differs
The observed major therapeutic response rate to EPI (25%) was identical to that observed with DOX (25%). On a molar basis, EPI was clearly less myelosuppressive than DOX; EPI was also less cardiotoxic. patients treated with DOX, only three patients who had received such radiotherapy actually developed CHF, one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm.

In each study, the partial response rates of the EPI and DOX arms were equivalent. At cumulative EPI doses of 600 to 700 mg/m2, two (13%) of the 15 evaluable patients at risk for RNCA changes developed a decrease in LVEF of > 10%. In the multidrug study, therapy was discontinued in seven patients on the DOX-containing (FAC) arm because of cardiac dysfunction, including three with heart failure.

Most patients in our trials received less than 550 mg/m2 of EPI; however, in 11 patients receiving cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1,465 mg/m2, RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients at 970, 1,180,1,190, and 1,465 mg/m2, respectively (C.W. Young, unpublished data, January, 1985, New York).

Our results show that EPI has therapeutic activity that is similar to that of DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer, and that EPI is a less cardiotoxic drug than DOX, even accounting for the difference in myelosuppressive potency. 

