A previous study reported improved survival among women with locally advanced cervical cancer who received prophylactic radiation to the para-aortic nodes. The results of these studies are inconclusive and have been criticized because they lacked a comparison group treated with radiation alone and because the radiation therapy used may have been deficient according to current standards. In 1990, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) began a randomized clinical trial to compare the effects on survival of treatment with extended-field radiation and treatment with pelvic radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy in patients with cervical cancer. Patients were required to understand the trial and provide written informed consent. 


Patients who completed the pretreatment evaluation and met all eligibility criteria were randomly assigned to receive extended field radiotherapy or radiotherapy to the pelvic region with concurrent treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil. The patients in each treatment group were stratified according to the tumor stage (IB, IIA, or IIB vs. Patients had a pelvic examination under anesthesia at the time of 

each intracavitary treatment. Radiotherapy records, including data concerning external-beam fields, intracavitary placement, doses of radiation to tumor and normal tissues, and other treatment variables, were reviewed by a radiation oncologist. On the basis of the results of two earlier RTOG trials, we predicted that the five-year survival rate for the control group (radiotherapy alone) would be 65 percent for patients with stage IB or II disease and 40 percent for patients with stage III or IVA disease. We estimated that 40 to 70 percent of the patients would have stage IB or II disease. 


RESULTS 

Characteristics of the Patients 

A total of 403 patients were enrolled in the study between September 1990 and November 1997: 201 were randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy, and 202 were assigned to receive radiotherapy alone. The characteristics of the two treatment groups are summarized in Table 2. 


Treatment and Compliance 

Radiotherapy was delivered according to the protocol or with minor deviations in 83 percent of the patients in the combined-therapy group and 84 percent of those in the radiotherapy group. Major but acceptable treatment deviations occurred in another 1 percent and 9 percent of these groups, respectively. Eleven patients (3 percent) did not undergo brachytherapy: three patients refused, and eight patients did not undergo it for other reasons. In all, 26 patients did not complete treatment. Of the 195 patients in the combination-therapy group, 159 (81 percent) completed at least two cycles of chemotherapy, and 133 (68 percent) completed three cycles. Chemotherapy was discontinued because of toxic effects in 9 patients, refusal to continue in the case of 17 patients, diminished performance status in 4 patients, and other reasons in 4 patients. Follow-up data were available for 193 of the 195 patients in the combined-therapy group and for all 193 patients in the radiotherapy group. Of these, 147 patients in the combined-therapy group (76 percent) and 122 patients in the radiotherapy group (63 percent) were alive at the time of the last analysis. In addition, 13 patients in the combined-therapy group and 32 patients in the radiotherapy group were alive but had recurrent cervical cancer. Kaplan–Meier analysis revealed that overall survival rates were significantly better among patients treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy than among those treated with radiotherapy alone (73 percent vs. Disease-free survival 

at five years was 67 percent in the combined-therapy group and 40 percent in the radiotherapy group, according to Kaplan–Meier analysis (P<0.001) (Fig. The relative likelihood of disease-free survival in the combined-therapy group, as compared with the radiotherapy group, was 0.48 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.35 to 0.66). Approximately 70 percent of the patients assigned to each group had stage IB, IIA, or IIB disease. For these patients, overall survival was significantly better if they were treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy. There was no significant difference in overall survival between treatment groups among patients who had stage III or IVA disease, although the study was not designed to have a sufficient number of patients in these subgroups to test for a statistically significant difference. For patients with stage III or IVA disease, the five-year disease-free survival rates were 58 percent in the combinedtherapy group and 38 percent in the radiotherapy group (P=0.13). 


DISCUSSION 

We found that the combination of pelvic radiation and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin and fluorouracil was more effective for locally advanced cervical cancer than pelvic and para-aortic radiation alone. For patients who were receiving postoperative radiation for rectal cancer, a prolonged, continuous infusion of fluorouracil with pelvic radiation was found to be more effective than short infusions. For patients with known metastases to the para-aortic lymph nodes, para-aortic radiation is probably necessary. 
