Patients were required to understand the trial and provide written informed consent. For patients who were assigned to receive radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the treatment field extended from the space between L4 and L5 to the midpubisor to a line 4 cm below the most distal vaginal or cervicalsite of disease. The protocol specified that all patients receive a total cumulativedose to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cmsuperior to the cervical os) of at least 85 Gy. The suggested maximal doses to the bladder, the rectum, and the lateral surface ofthe vagina were 75, 70, and 130 Gy, respectively. To avoid treatment delays, intracavitary insertions were performed without chemotherapy if apatient had a granulocyte count of less than 1500 per cubic millimeterand a platelet count of less than 100,000 per cubic millimeter.

Follow-up
During treatment, patients were evaluated weekly by clinical assessments,a complete blood count with differential and platelet counts, and a pelvic examination. Variations were scored as minor, major but acceptable,or major and unacceptable, if they differed by more than 5, 10, or20 percent, respectively, from the specified dose of radiation orduration of treatment. The Cox proportional-hazards model was used to estimate the hazard ratios. The statistical significance of associations between treatment assignments and characteristics of the patients was assessed by chi-square analysis. To detect such a difference, we predicted that we would need to enroll 400 women in the study over a four-year period and then follow them for an additional four years. Interim analyses were scheduled to occur when 50 percent ofthe patients had been enrolled and when the enrollment goal was met. For this early report, we updated the results using all information received and entered at study headquarters by November 11, 1998.

Fifteen patients (4 percent) — six in the combined-therapy group and nine in the radiotherapy group — were subsequently disqualified because of failure to undergo the required evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes (eight patients),the presence of extrapelvic cancer (two), the presence of a rare histologic subtype (one), the presence of a stage IB1 tumor with no involvement of pelvic nodes (one), the absence of pretreatment data(two), and receipt of chemotherapy before radiotherapy(one). 

There were no significant differencesin these characteristics between the groups. Of the 195 patients in the combination-therapy group, 159 (81 percent) completed at least two cycles of chemotherapy, and 133 (68 percent) completed three cycles. Chemotherapy was discontinued because of toxic effects in 9 patients, refusal to continue in the case of 17 patients, diminished performance status in 4 patients, and other reasons in 4 patients.The late complications of treatment are summarized in Table 4. There were no significant differences in the seriousness of late effects between the treatment groups.

Outcome
The median duration of follow-up was 43 months. Follow-up data were available for 193 of the 195 patientsin the combined-therapy group and for all 193 patients in the radiotherapy group. In addition, 13 patients in the combined-therapy groupand 32 patients in the radiotherapy group were alive but had recurrent cervical cancer. Kaplan–Meieranalysis revealed that overall survival rates were significantly better among patients treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy than among those treated with radiotherapy alone (73 percent vs. 58 percent,P=0.004) (Table 5 and Fig. 1). Disease-free survival at five years was 67 percent in the combined-therapy group and 40 percent in the radiotherapy group,according to Kaplan–Meier analysis (P<0.001). For these patients, overall survival was significantly better if they were treated with radiotherapyand chemotherapy. For patients with stage III or IVA disease, the five-year disease free survival rates were 58 percent in the combined therapy group and 38 percent in the radiotherapygroup (P=0.13).

DISCUSSION
We found that the combination of pelvic radiationand concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin andfluorouracil was more effective for locally advanced cervical cancer than pelvic and para-aortic radiation alone. Although chemotherapy increased the hematologic toxicity, this effect was reversible and the incidence of late side effects was similar in the two treatment groups. We are not the first to investigate the role of concomitant chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer. The Gynecologic Oncology Group has also studied the effect of radiotherapy in combination with either hydroxyurea or placeboin women with stage IIIB or IVA disease. Although the group reported significant improvements in overall and disease-free survival with the addition of hydroxyureatherapy, the study has been criticized for the use of a low dose of radiation and the poor survivalrates in both groups and because more than half of the 190 patients who were enrolled could not be evaluated. 

Our treatment regimen differed from previous regimens in several ways. Our protocol emphasized the importance of delivering a radiation dose of atleast 85 Gy to point A within eight weeks whenever possible. The results of the Patterns of Care studies and large retrospective analyses suggest that these features correlate with survival rates and rates of local control of cervicalcancer. We also used a somewhat more aggressive regimen of chemotherapy than have other groups.