SINCE JUNE 1973, the therapeutic and toxicologic effects of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil) chemotherapy were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan as adjuvant treatment in patients with operable breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes. After radical mastectomy, eligible patients were prospectively randomized to receive either no further treatment or 12 monthly cycles of adjuvant CMF. The preliminary 3-yr results have shown that in premenopausal women, 6 cycles of CMF yielded results that were identical to those obtained with 12 cycles. This article presents the 5-yr results achieved in our study.

Study Design and Treatment Schedule
Adjuvant chemotherapy was started within 2-4 wk from mastectomy. A total of 18 patients older than 65 yr (CMF 12: 12, CMF 6: 6) were started on low-dose CMF (MTX 30 mg/sq m, FU 400 mg/sq m). During treatment, a dose reduction schedule was applied to all patients showing myelosuppression on days 1 and 8 of each treatment cycle. At first relapse, treatment was uniform for both groups of women. The following systemic treatment was mainly utilized: patients in whom estrogen receptors were positive were subjected to hormonal manipulations (ovariectomy in premenopausal women and additive hormonal therapy, particularly tamoxifen, in postmenopausal patients), combined sometimes with chemotherapy. Patient Population
Of 466 patients entered into the study, 7 premenopausal women were considered nonevaluable because of protocol violations. In fact, the retrospective evaluation of roentgenograms revealed the presence of distant metastases prior to radical mastectomy in 3 patients (CMF 12: 1; CMF 6: 2), while 4 additional women (CMF 12: 3; CMF 6: 1) had fixation of the primary tumor to the underlying pectoral fascia or muscle (T3b). Therefore, a total of 459 patients were found evaluable for treatment comparison, i.e., 243 women (premenopausal 160, postmenopausal 83) allocated in the 12-cycle group and 216 (premenopausal 164, postmenopausal 52) in the 6-cycle group, respectively. ER tumors were considered positive in 177 patients (69.4%), negative in 47 (18.4%), while the remaining tumors (12.2%) were considered to have borderline values.

Study Parameters
RESULTS
Results as Function of Treatment Programs
Figure 1 shows that the comparative RFS at 5 yr was practically identical in the two treatment groups (CMF 12: 59%; CMF 6: 65.6%, p =0.17). It appears evident that treatment regimens were unable to significantly affect the RFS within each patient subset. It is important to emphasize that overall no RFS difference was documented between preand postmenopausal patients (CMF 12: 59.3% versus 57.6%; CMF 6: 66.5% versus 63.1%,
The somewhat contrasting results observed in the 6-cycle group in pre- and postmenopausal patients with 1-3 nodes (80.3% versus 66.1%) again reflect only a fictitious difference (SE: 4.1 and 8.1, respectively). Again, no difference was observed in the two treatment groups. No difference in the pattern of treatment failure was evident between the treatment groups (Table 2). Results as Function of ER status
As can be seen, RFS was superior in patients with ER + tumors, but this difference failed to reach statistical significance in all patient subsets. Also, no difference was evident when overall survival of postmenopausal women was examined (ER+ 82.5% versus ER- 76.2%, p =0.32). By contrast, premenopausal women with ER + tumors had a significantly longer survival than their matches with ER- tumors (79.9% versus 67.6%, p = 0.03). Results as Function of Dose Levels of CMF
Furthermore, within each dose level, there was no statistically significant difference between patients in the 12- or 6-cycle group.

Frequency of second tumors was similar in both treatment groups. As already reported (Table 2), contralateral breast cancer was documented in a total of 11 patients (CMF 12: 6; CMF 6: 5). Four additional patients showed second tumors other than breast cancer. In one patient of the 6-cycle group, endometrial carcinoma in situ was documented within 16 mo from mastectomy; 3 patients in the 12-cycle group developed endometrial carcinoma, thyroid cancer, and myoblastoma, respectively, and in all patients second neoplasms were diagnosed between 46 and 49 mo from mastectomy. So far no patient has developed acute leukemia. Besides RFS and survival, other findings would support evidence that 6 cycles of CMF are as effective as 12 cycles. The first and most important one is that there appears to be no real difference following adjuvant chemotherapy, namely CMF, between the RFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women (CMF 12: 59.3% versus 57.6%; CMF 6: 66.5% versus 63.1%, respectively). Low-dose CMF was applied only in 12 of 83 (14%) of the present 12-cycle group and in 6 of 52 (12%) of the 6-cycle group. More recently, the Guy's Hospital and Manchester study groups reported the actuarial 5-yr RFS of a randomized study comparing radical mastectomy alone versus melphalan versus CMF and showed that the only group significantly improved by adjuvant CMF was that of postmenopausal women, while premenopausal patients had findings that were superimposable in all three treatment groups. A trend favoring postmenopausal versus premenopausal women given adjuvant combination chemotherapy was also observed by the NSABP group. Based on our current findings, i.e., therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant CMF regardless of ER status, there seems to be no clinical reason to withhold the administration of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in node positive women even in the presence of ER + tumors. studies. Thus, from available reports it appears that different adjuvant treatments consisting of a single multidrug regimen can achieve comparable RFS results regardless of treatment duration. 

