To improve theresults achieved with a single multidrug regimen,more intensive forms of treatment, i.e., utilizing noncross-resistant combinations, warrant careful evaluation. The aim of the first program was to evaluate whether CMF given after radical surgerywas able to alter the course of the disease. All our progress reports have consistently demonstrated that there was a significant difference in the relapse-free survival (RFS) favoring patients who received adjuvant CMF. Among the numerous questions to be answered by current adjuvant studies is the optimal duration of treatment. For this reason, in September 1975, we started a new prospective study with the intent to evaluate the possibility of reducing the duration of adjuvant CMF without compromising the therapeuticeffect of combined treatment. This article presents the 5-yr results achieved in our study.

Before being allocated to either treatment group, patients were stratified according to the number ofaxillary nodes involved (1-3 or more than 3). Based on the 3-yr analysis of our first CMF study showing an apparent lack of therapeutic advantage following adjuvant chemotherapy in postmenopausal women, randomizationfor this group of patients was discontinued at the end of November 1976. 

All patients were subjected to either Halsted or modified radical mastectomy, but a small fraction (16%) was subjected toextended radical mastectomy. Adjuvant chemotherapy was started within 2-4 wk from mastectomy. The dose schedule of CMF was as follows, cyclophosphamide (CTX) 100mg/sq m by mouth from day 1 to day 14, methotrexate (MTX) 40 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8, and fluorouracil (FU)600 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8. 

Primary treatment failure was accurately assessed by clinical,radiologic, and whenever feasible, histologic examination of thesite(s) of first relapse. In fact, the retrospective evaluation of roentgenograms revealed the presence of distant metastases prior to radical mastectomy in 3 patients (CMF 12, 1, CMF 6, 2), while 4 additional women(CMF 12, 3, CMF 6, 1) had fixation of the primary tumor to the underlying pectoral fascia or muscle (T3b). Furthermore, in 5 additional patients, CMF was temporarily discontinued at some time duringtreatment (for 2-3 mo) because women complained of constant nausea due to oral cyclophosphamide. All these patients were considered evaluable.

The majority of our patients (62%) had less than 3 nodesinvolved, and in half of the women tumors ranged between 2 and5 cm on pathologic measurement. Again,no difference was observed in the two treatment groups. The same held true when findings wer erelated to menopausal status. In fact, premenopausal patients in the 12-cycle group had a 72%5-yr survival compared to 77.1% for women in the 6-cycle group (p = 0.20). It is important to note that the frequency of local-regional recurrences, either alone or associated to distant metastases, was in the range of 8%-10%. No substantial difference was also documented in the pattern ofnew disease manifestations, either local-regional or distant, between pre- and postmenopausal women.

Results as Function of ER status
Regardless of the type of treatment, RFS andoverall survival were correlated with the presence(ER +) or absence (ER -) of estrogen receptorsin the primary tumor. Also, no difference was evident when overallsurvival of postmenopausal women was examined(ER+ 82.5% versus ER- 76.2%, p =0.32). Table4 shows that also in this series there was evidenceof a dose-response effect, regardless of menopausaland nodal status (CMF 12, level I 68.9%versus level 11147.2%, p < 0.05, CMF 6, level I66.6% versus level III 51.5%, p = 0.10). Nausea, vomiting, and hair loss were the most distressing side effects. Myelosuppression represented the dose-limiting factor in the large majority of patients (70%-80%), but severe leukopenia and/or thrombocytopenia were rare(10%), and prolonged myelosuppression beyond the fourth week from drug discontinuation was never observed. Four additional patients showed second tumors other than breast cancer. 

Present results are in line with those reported in a similar study carried out at the Sidney FarberCancer Institute. Henderson et al.15 reported that at 6 yr of follow-up (median 2.6 yr), no RFS orsurvival difference was evident between the twogroups. Furthermore,all women were accurately treated andfollowed in a single center by the same staff ofsurgeons, medical oncologists, and research nurses. The first and most important one is that thereappears to be no real difference following adjuvantchemotherapy, namely CMF, between theRFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women(CMF 12, 59.3% versus 57.6%, CMF 6, 66.5% versus 63.1%, respectively). Low-dose CMF was applied only in 12 of 83 (14%) of the present 12-cycle group and in 6 of52 (12%) of the 6-cycle group. A trendfavoring postmenopausal versus premenopausal women given adjuvant combination chemotherapywas also observed by the NSABP group. Effective adjuvant combination chemotherapyseems to be unaffected by ER status, at least when RFS is considered. The results obtained in our series between ER + and ER -tumors, coupled with the overall findings observedin the two menopausal groups, further contribute to minimize the possible therapeuticrole of chemotherapy-induced adjuvant castrationin premenopausal women. Through the analysis of our results inadvanced breast cancer treated with CMF, Skipper came to the conclusion that in clinically metastaticdisease the nadir in surviving tumor cellsis probably reached in the majority of patients inless than 6 cycles. 26 Our clinical findings from anadjuvant treatment support this conclusion andindicate that the maximum therapeutic effect canbe obtained with 6 or probably less than 6 cyclesof CMF. 
This observation is indirectly supported by findings obtained at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center"7where 24 cycles of CMF were unable to obtain results superior to those achieved in our series. Also, the Arizona group'8 utilizing a different combination regimen, i.e., adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide,for about 6 mo achieved a 5-yrRFS that is very similar to that observed in our studies. 

Moreover, a less protracted exposure to cytotoxic regimens, including alkylating agents and adriamycin, could decrease the potential risk of delayed morbidity, namelycancerogenesis and chronic organ damage. Repetitive dose treatments either eradicate all or the vast majority of drug-sensitiveneoplastic cells or hold them in check, leaving fluctuating and sometimes larger numbers ofdrug-resistant cells. This appears to be a basic law that underlies and explains some (not all) importantand consistent observations in the area of cancer chemotherapy. 28 In our optimal kinetic situation,cyclic or sequential delivery of equally effectiveand non-cross-resistant drugs often will prevent or delay failures due to overgrowth of drug-resistantsublines of neoplastic cells, as recentlydemonstrated in advanced Hodgkin's disease. At present, tumor cell burden in the axilla appears to consistently represent an important prognostic factor, even in the presence of full dose chemotherapy, whilenew prospective trials should explore the potentialefficacy of multiple non-cross-resistant drug combinations delivered for a relatively short time.
