

Background 


In 1992, Morton et al. published the results of their study, the first ever undertaken, about the
utilityof sentinel node biopsy (SNB) for patients with primary cutaneous melanoma (PCM) whose
regional lymphnodes were not palpable clinically. They averred that metastasisfrom a PCM nearly
always is found in the SN. Conversely, they opined that if the SN did not harbour ametastasis of
melanoma, then nodes other than the sentinel one almost always were negative for metastases.


The purpose of SNB, as it was expressed then by Morton et al., was as follows, ¡®¡¦ this technique
[SNB]identifies with a high degree of accuracy, patients with early stage melanoma who have nodal
metastasesand are likely to benefit from radical lymphadenectomy¡¯. 


Elective node dissection and sentinel node biopsy followed by dissection of regional nodes areone
and the same procedure fundamentally, and, therefore, results of studies that pertain to
electivenode dissection are applicable equally to sentinel node biopsy 


In 2003, McMasters and Swetter stated that elective node dissection (END) and regional node
dissection(RND) performed because of a positive SN are two different procedures and, that being the
case, advisedthat any comparison between them would be fraught with inaccuracy. They reasoned that
because 80% ofpatients who undergo END did not have metastases of melanoma, only 20%, at most, of
patients could benefitfrom it and, moreover, statistical analysis was unlikely to detect that
benefit. The supposition of McMastersand Swetter is wrong, the function of statistical analysis is
to determine any possible benefit to survival,and there is no such benefit. 


In the same paragraph of the same article, having pronounced that studies of END are not applicable
toSNB, McMasters and Swetter drew, inexplicably, on findings in a study by Balch et al. in order to
lendsupport to the notion that SNB with subsequent RND may benefit certain sets of patients with
metastasesof melanoma, the rationale for that being that END appears to benefit those patients. But
it is bothillogical and disingenuous to introduce studies of END that are biased with regard to
selectivity andthe results of which are contradictory. 


In brief, it must be comprehended fully that SNB followed by RND is simply an END that has been
precededby a SNB. The objective and rationale of both procedures is to remove all regional nodes
that containmetastases of melanoma as a preventive measure to nodes that harbour metastases from
becoming palpableclinically and from disseminating, thereby allowing patients, in theory, to live
longer. If END is bereftof benefit, so, too, it must be for SNB followed by RND. 


Elective node dissection provides no benefit to patients with metastases of melanoma 


This is how they set forththeir opinion, ¡®¡¦ immediate lymphadenectomy [END] seems to be of no
significant benefit to the patient¡¯.


In 1980 and again in 1982, Veronesi and collaborators, on the basis of a study performed by them
prospectivelyin which 553 patients were randomized either to be followed with observation only or to
be subjectedto END, came to this conclusion, ¡®¡¦ delayed node dissection is as effective as the
immediate dissection[END] in stage I melanoma of the extremities¡¦¡¯, that is, survival of patients
with metastases of melanomawas the same overall irrespective of whether or not they had had a
¡®delayed node dissection¡¯, to wit,either extirpation of regional nodes at the time that metastases
became manifest clinically or END. 


In 1996 and in 2000, Balch et al. published results of studies that concerned survival of 740
patientswith PCM. Of those, 379 patients underwent END dissection, whereas the remainder (361),
after wide localexcision of the PCM, simply were observed. They learned, just as had Veronesi et al.
and Sim et al.,that patients who had had an END benefited not a whit from the procedure. In 2000,
Balch and coauthorssaid this tersely about the matter, ¡®¡¦ melanoma patients as a group did not
benefit from ELND [END]¡¯.


A fourth study about these issues was carried out by Cascinelli et al. who, by 1998, also came to
believethat END profited patients not at all. They commented about the matter thus, ¡®Our results
from thisrandomized trial confirm the inefficacy of elective regional node dissection as routine
treatment inall melanoma patients with a primary melanoma of the trunk thicker than 1.5mm(P =
0.09)¡¯. 


In sum and in short, four prospective randomized studies were performed for the purpose,
specifically,of determining the worth of END and all four found it wanting, the results were the
same in each investigation,namely, that END provides no benefit to patients whose melanoma has
metastasized to nodes. 


Numerous studies undertaken in retrospect have generated results that were interpreted as being
proofthat END benefits patients with metastases of melanoma. 


Only one uncompelling bit of evidence can be marshalled on behalf of the thesis that END may confer
benefit on patients, and that is derived from the study conducted by Balch et al. presented first
in1996 as a work in progress and then in 2000 as a work completed. But the benefit that accrued to
those patients was not substantial, the P-values rangingfrom 0.03 to 0.05. 


The results of the ¡®completed¡¯ study by Balch et al. published in 2000 are in synchrony with
thoseof the three other prospective randomized studies on END cited previously, that is, END confers
no benefitwhatsoever on patients with metastases of melanoma. 


The studies conducted on elective node dissection are solid and the results convincing,
irrespectiveof whether or not lymphoscintigraphy was utilized to map nodal basins 


In 2001, Reintgen and associates, in what seems to be an attempt deliberately to negate the results
ofthe prospective randomized studies performed by Sim et al. and Veronesi et al. on one hand and to
bolsterthe position of Balch et al. with regard to END on the other, proclaimed the following in
these words,¡®The old trials of elective lymph node dissection (ELND) (WHO trials, #1, 13, Mayo
Clinic Trial) areun-interpretable in light of what we know about the adequate power of trials and
the importance of definingthe cutaneous anatomy with the use of lymphatic mapping principles. 


The issue of lymphoscintigraphy as prerequisite for accurate assessment of nodes most likely to
harbourmetastatic melanoma is a red herring because all prospective randomized studies of END have
reached thevery same conclusion, no matter whether lymphoscintigraphy was operative or not, namely,
END providesno benefit to a patient. 


The authors claim that the results of their study indicate that regionallymphadenectomy after a SNB
may cure patients of metastatic melanoma, a statement that is in synchronywith their claim that
regional lymphadenectomy may cure patients whose nodes are palpable clinically.


That estimate, namely, approximately 16 months from the timea metastasis of melanoma reaches a node
to the time that that node is replete sufficiently with cellsof melanoma that it becomes overtly
palpable clinically, is not substantiated in the least by anythingthat appears in the article by
Balch et al. And neither did Pack et al. in 1945 provide any evidenceon behalf of their contention
concerning the same matter when they made this assertion, ¡®¡¦ we haveshown that an average time of
15 months elapses from the time the primary melanoma is recognized beforemetastasis in inguinal
nodes are apparent¡¯. 


Cameron, in 1968, writing about the spreadof melanoma and the mode whereby metastasis occurs,
observed that (1) ¡®spread within the lymphaticsis by embolism and also by permeation¡¯ and (2)
¡®melanoma may gain access to the veins and at an earlystage travel by the blood stream, causing
widespread dissemination.¡¯ In actuality, nodes are not trapsor dams, as has been alleged dutifully
by generations of pedagogues of general pathology and of generalsurgery, but are filters that have
been shown to allow passage of fluid, air, erythrocytes, lymphocytes,bacteria and viable neoplastic
cells into the efferent lymphatics and into the rest of the vascular system.


A metastasis may make itself known (i) in the same basin from whichthe SN was harvested, (ii) near
the site of the primary melanoma, i.e. a ¡®satellite¡¯, (iii) en routeto regional nodes, i.e. ¡®in
transit¡¯, or (iv) beyond the regional nodes, i.e. ¡®distant¡¯. 


Assessment histopathologically of SNs and secondary nodes for the purpose of determiningwhether or
not they house melanoma cells serves only as a springboard for speculation about when
metastasesbeyond nodes in an individual patient will make themselves known clinically, it may be
days or decades,but, if the patient does not die of another cause, those metastases are likely in
the extreme to becomeapparent clinically in time, uncertainty exists only with regard to when. 


The results are certain to indicate that those operations, to wit, SNBwith dissection subsequently
of the entire basin (if the SN has been found to contain a metastasis ofmelanoma), have no efficacy
whatsoever because once cells of a PCM enter the lymphatics, they are likelyto be swept to, and
through, nodes or bypass them completely, either by way of lymphatic channels thatanastomose or by
entry of lymph directly into the blood vascular system. A metastasis isa metastasis, with all that
that implies with regard to prognosis, i.e. grim. 


That nodes do not halt malignant cells in their tracks has been demonstrated unequivocally by
studiesperformed recently on carcinoma of the breast, cells of the carcinoma being noted by
conventional microscopyto be present in bone marrow even when regional nodes were negative for
carcinoma. 


Those metastaseswere discovered easily because those nodes were enlarged clinically. 
