

Conversely, they opined that if the SN did not harbour ametastasis of melanoma, then nodes other
than the sentinel one almost always were negative for metastases.


In 2003, McMasters and Swetter stated that elective node dissection (END) and regional node
dissection(RND) performed because of a positive SN are two different procedures and, that being the
case, advisedthat any comparison between them would be fraught with inaccuracy. They reasoned that
because 80% ofpatients who undergo END did not have metastases of melanoma, only 20%, at most, of
patients could benefitfrom it and, moreover, statistical analysis was unlikely to detect that
benefit. The supposition of McMastersand Swetter is wrong, the function of statistical analysis is
to determine any possible benefit to survival,and there is no such benefit. 


The objective and rationale of both procedures is to remove all regional nodes that
containmetastases of melanoma as a preventive measure to nodes that harbour metastases from becoming
palpableclinically and from disseminating, thereby allowing patients, in theory, to live longer. 


Elective node dissection provides no benefit to patients with metastases of melanoma 


In 1980 and again in 1982, Veronesi and collaborators, on the basis of a study performed by them
prospectivelyin which 553 patients were randomized either to be followed with observation only or to
be subjectedto END, came to this conclusion, ¡®¡¦ delayed node dissection is as effective as the
immediate dissection[END] in stage I melanoma of the extremities¡¦¡¯, that is, survival of patients
with metastases of melanomawas the same overall irrespective of whether or not they had had a
¡®delayed node dissection¡¯, to wit,either extirpation of regional nodes at the time that metastases
became manifest clinically or END. 


In sum and in short, four prospective randomized studies were performed for the purpose,
specifically,of determining the worth of END and all four found it wanting, the results were the
same in each investigation,namely, that END provides no benefit to patients whose melanoma has
metastasized to nodes. 


Only one uncompelling bit of evidence can be marshalled on behalf of the thesis that END may confer
benefit on patients, and that is derived from the study conducted by Balch et al. presented first
in1996 as a work in progress and then in 2000 as a work completed. 


The results are certain to indicate that those operations, to wit, SNBwith dissection subsequently
of the entire basin (if the SN has been found to contain a metastasis ofmelanoma), have no efficacy
whatsoever because once cells of a PCM enter the lymphatics, they are likelyto be swept to, and
through, nodes or bypass them completely, either by way of lymphatic channels thatanastomose or by
entry of lymph directly into the blood vascular system. 
