

Conversely, they opined that if the SN did not harbour ametastasis of melanoma, then nodes other
than the sentinel one almost always were negative for metastases.


In 2003, McMasters and Swetter stated that elective node dissection (END) and regional node
dissection(RND) performed because of a positive SN are two different procedures and, that being the
case, advisedthat any comparison between them would be fraught with inaccuracy. They reasoned that
because 80% ofpatients who undergo END did not have metastases of melanoma, only 20%, at most, of
patients could benefitfrom it and, moreover, statistical analysis was unlikely to detect that
benefit. The supposition of McMastersand Swetter is wrong, the function of statistical analysis is
to determine any possible benefit to survival,and there is no such benefit. 


The objective and rationale of both procedures is to remove all regional nodes that
containmetastases of melanoma as a preventive measure to nodes that harbour metastases from becoming
palpableclinically and from disseminating, thereby allowing patients, in theory, to live longer. 


Elective node dissection provides no benefit to patients with metastases of melanoma 


In 1980 and again in 1982, Veronesi and collaborators, on the basis of a study performed by them
prospectivelyin which 553 patients were randomized either to be followed with observation only or to
be subjectedto END, came to this conclusion, ¡®¡¦ delayed node dissection is as effective as the
immediate dissection[END] in stage I melanoma of the extremities¡¦¡¯, that is, survival of patients
with metastases of melanomawas the same overall irrespective of whether or not they had had a
¡®delayed node dissection¡¯, to wit,either extirpation of regional nodes at the time that metastases
became manifest clinically or END. 


In sum and in short, four prospective randomized studies were performed for the purpose,
specifically,of determining the worth of END and all four found it wanting, the results were the
same in each investigation,namely, that END provides no benefit to patients whose melanoma has
metastasized to nodes. 


Only one uncompelling bit of evidence can be marshalled on behalf of the thesis that END may confer
benefit on patients, and that is derived from the study conducted by Balch et al. presented first
in1996 as a work in progress and then in 2000 as a work completed. 


The results of the ¡®completed¡¯ study by Balch et al. published in 2000 are in synchrony with
thoseof the three other prospective randomized studies on END cited previously, that is, END confers
no benefitwhatsoever on patients with metastases of melanoma. 


The issue of lymphoscintigraphy as prerequisite for accurate assessment of nodes most likely to
harbourmetastatic melanoma is a red herring because all prospective randomized studies of END have
reached thevery same conclusion, no matter whether lymphoscintigraphy was operative or not, namely,
END providesno benefit to a patient. 


The authors claim that the results of their study indicate that regionallymphadenectomy after a SNB
may cure patients of metastatic melanoma, a statement that is in synchronywith their claim that
regional lymphadenectomy may cure patients whose nodes are palpable clinically.


That estimate, namely, approximately 16 months from the timea metastasis of melanoma reaches a node
to the time that that node is replete sufficiently with cellsof melanoma that it becomes overtly
palpable clinically, is not substantiated in the least by anythingthat appears in the article by
Balch et al. And neither did Pack et al. in 1945 provide any evidenceon behalf of their contention
concerning the same matter when they made this assertion, ¡®¡¦ we haveshown that an average time of
15 months elapses from the time the primary melanoma is recognized beforemetastasis in inguinal
nodes are apparent¡¯. 


Cameron, in 1968, writing about the spreadof melanoma and the mode whereby metastasis occurs,
observed that (1) ¡®spread within the lymphaticsis by embolism and also by permeation¡¯ and (2)
¡®melanoma may gain access to the veins and at an earlystage travel by the blood stream, causing
widespread dissemination.¡¯ In actuality, nodes are not trapsor dams, as has been alleged dutifully
by generations of pedagogues of general pathology and of generalsurgery, but are filters that have
been shown to allow passage of fluid, air, erythrocytes, lymphocytes,bacteria and viable neoplastic
cells into the efferent lymphatics and into the rest of the vascular system.


A metastasis may make itself known (i) in the same basin from whichthe SN was harvested, (ii) near
the site of the primary melanoma, i.e. a ¡®satellite¡¯, (iii) en routeto regional nodes, i.e. ¡®in
transit¡¯, or (iv) beyond the regional nodes, i.e. ¡®distant¡¯. 


Assessment histopathologically of SNs and secondary nodes for the purpose of determiningwhether or
not they house melanoma cells serves only as a springboard for speculation about when
metastasesbeyond nodes in an individual patient will make themselves known clinically, it may be
days or decades,but, if the patient does not die of another cause, those metastases are likely in
the extreme to becomeapparent clinically in time, uncertainty exists only with regard to when. 


The results are certain to indicate that those operations, to wit, SNBwith dissection subsequently
of the entire basin (if the SN has been found to contain a metastasis ofmelanoma), have no efficacy
whatsoever because once cells of a PCM enter the lymphatics, they are likelyto be swept to, and
through, nodes or bypass them completely, either by way of lymphatic channels thatanastomose or by
entry of lymph directly into the blood vascular system. A metastasis isa metastasis, with all that
that implies with regard to prognosis, i.e. grim. 


That nodes do not halt malignant cells in their tracks has been demonstrated unequivocally by
studiesperformed recently on carcinoma of the breast, cells of the carcinoma being noted by
conventional microscopyto be present in bone marrow even when regional nodes were negative for
carcinoma. 


Those metastaseswere discovered easily because those nodes were enlarged clinically. 
