

Therapeutic lymph node dissection removes the regional nodes from patients who have detectable
nodalmetastases. 


LM/SL is NOT the same as selective complete lymph node dissection (CLND), the purpose of which is
thetherapeutic excision of all nodes within the regional basin of a patient whose nodal metastases
havealready been identified by LM/SL staging. However, if metastasis in the regional nodalbasin
beyond a tumour-positive SN is suspected or confirmed, regional nodal surgery beyond the SN
procedureis, by definition, a therapeutic lymph node dissection. 


Only 20% of patients who haveintermediate-thickness primary melanomas and non-palpable regional
lymph nodes actually have nodal metastasisby histology, including immunohistology. 


LM/SL evolved from our hypothesisthat a primary melanoma metastasizing via the lymphatics will lodge
in the first lymph nodes on the directlymphatic drainage pathway from the primary cutaneous site,
before spreading to other nodes further alongthe lymphatic chain. 


However, according to the marker hypothesis, a primary melanoma metastasizes simultaneously
vialymphatic and haematogenous routes, so that the presence of nodal metastases becomes a marker
ratherthan a precursor of clinically relevant and progressive systemic disease. 


100 % - [(the proportion of patients without nodal micrometastases) +         (the proportion of
patientswith nodal metastases and systemic metastases) +         (the proportion of patients whose
metastaseswill never extend beyond the           regional basins and will exhibit long-termsurvival
following delayedresection          of macroscopic (palpable) nodes)] 


Removal of the regional nodes seems unlikely to affect overall survival in the presence of
substantial and progressive distant metastases, although the effect on survival ofpatients with tiny
or latent metastases remains to be determined. 


This interaction could explain the significantlyincreased number of tumour-involved nodes and
relatively unfavourable survival when CLND is delayed andthen performed to remove palpable rather
than subclinical metastases (Table 1).


After the development of substantial and progressive systemic metastases, surgical removal of the
regionalnodes should not influence the growth of distant metastases (unless these are relatively
small and composedof tumour cells susceptible to rejection by host immune defences), nor change the
long-term melanoma-specific survival. 


These factors could explain why a clinically palpable (2.3 cm) nodal metastasiscontaining more than
10 billion melanoma cells can exist without additional nodal or systemic involvement,and why
therapeutic lymph node dissection can be followed by survival of 25 years or more without
recurrence.
