

We appreciate the opportunity to respond to Dr Medalie¡¯s and Dr Ackerman¡¯s curious and premature
attemptto discredit sentinel node biopsy. 


Moreover, its potential morbidityis substantial especially considering that 80.90% of patients
(depending upon the thickness of the primarymelanoma) cannot benefit because they have no nodal
metastases. As we previously reported, and as Drs Medalie and Ackerman point out, prospective
controlledstudies of ELND have not demonstrated a survival advantage for all primary melanoma
patients treatedthis way. We remind DrsMedalie and Ackerman of the results of the Intergroup
Melanoma Surgical Trial, a randomized study thatdemonstrated a survival benefit of ELND for
prospectively defined subgroups of melanoma patients. 


Therapeutic lymph node dissection removes the regional nodes from patients who have detectable
nodalmetastases. This confers some therapeutic advantage and can lead to prolonged survival, to a
degree thatis inversely related to the number of tumour-involved nodes.


LM/SLis designed to identify clinically occult metastases. 


LM/SL is NOT the same as selective complete lymph node dissection (CLND), the purpose of which is
thetherapeutic excision of all nodes within the regional basin of a patient whose nodal metastases
havealready been identified by LM/SL staging. It is theoretically possible that this procedure might
also be therapeutic if regional metastasis isconfined to the SN, and this possibility is currently
under study in a Phase III multicentre trial sponsoredby a National Institutes of Health Program
Project grant. However, if metastasis in the regional nodalbasin beyond a tumour-positive SN is
suspected or confirmed, regional nodal surgery beyond the SN procedureis, by definition, a
therapeutic lymph node dissection. 


Even though the chance of long-term survival is inversely related to the tumour burden within
regionalnodes, Drs Medalie and Ackerman apparently would have us wait until a patient develops
multiple palpable(and thus relatively burdensome) metastases with a concomitant decrease in the
chance of long-term survival.Since virtually all patients who have SN micrometastases detectable by
LM/SL will eventually developclinically detectable nodal metastases if managed only by wide excision
and observation, what do theypropose? 


Only 20% of patients who haveintermediate-thickness primary melanomas and non-palpable regional
lymph nodes actually have nodal metastasisby histology, including immunohistology. 


LM/SL evolved from our hypothesisthat a primary melanoma metastasizing via the lymphatics will lodge
in the first lymph nodes on the directlymphatic drainage pathway from the primary cutaneous site,
before spreading to other nodes further alongthe lymphatic chain. 


However, according to the marker hypothesis, a primary melanoma metastasizes simultaneously
vialymphatic and haematogenous routes, so that the presence of nodal metastases becomes a marker
ratherthan a precursor of clinically relevant and progressive systemic disease. 


100 % - [(the proportion of patients without nodal micrometastases) +         (the proportion of
patientswith nodal metastases and systemic metastases) +         (the proportion of patients whose
metastaseswill never extend beyond the           regional basins and will exhibit long-termsurvival
following delayedresection          of macroscopic (palpable) nodes)] 


Removal of the regional nodes seems unlikely to affect overall survival in the presence of
substantial and progressive distant metastases, although the effect on survival ofpatients with tiny
or latent metastases remains to be determined. 


This interaction could explain the significantlyincreased number of tumour-involved nodes and
relatively unfavourable survival when CLND is delayed andthen performed to remove palpable rather
than subclinical metastases (Table 1).


After the development of substantial and progressive systemic metastases, surgical removal of the
regionalnodes should not influence the growth of distant metastases (unless these are relatively
small and composedof tumour cells susceptible to rejection by host immune defences), nor change the
long-term melanoma-specific survival. 


These factors could explain why a clinically palpable (2.3 cm) nodal metastasiscontaining more than
10 billion melanoma cells can exist without additional nodal or systemic involvement,and why
therapeutic lymph node dissection can be followed by survival of 25 years or more without
recurrence.


Therefore, LM/SL may also have therapeutic utilityin patients whose primary lesion has spread to the
regional lymph nodes, however, the presence and magnitudeof a therapeutic benefit cannot be
determined until the results of the randomized MSLT-I and II trialsare complete. 
