

We appreciate the opportunity to respond to Dr Medalie¡¯s and Dr Ackerman¡¯s curious and premature
attemptto discredit sentinel node biopsy. 


Moreover, its potential morbidityis substantial especially considering that 80.90% of patients
(depending upon the thickness of the primarymelanoma) cannot benefit because they have no nodal
metastases. As we previously reported, and as Drs Medalie and Ackerman point out, prospective
controlledstudies of ELND have not demonstrated a survival advantage for all primary melanoma
patients treatedthis way. We remind DrsMedalie and Ackerman of the results of the Intergroup
Melanoma Surgical Trial, a randomized study thatdemonstrated a survival benefit of ELND for
prospectively defined subgroups of melanoma patients. 


Therapeutic lymph node dissection removes the regional nodes from patients who have detectable
nodalmetastases. This confers some therapeutic advantage and can lead to prolonged survival, to a
degree thatis inversely related to the number of tumour-involved nodes.


LM/SLis designed to identify clinically occult metastases. 


LM/SL is NOT the same as selective complete lymph node dissection (CLND), the purpose of which is
thetherapeutic excision of all nodes within the regional basin of a patient whose nodal metastases
havealready been identified by LM/SL staging. It is theoretically possible that this procedure might
also be therapeutic if regional metastasis isconfined to the SN, and this possibility is currently
under study in a Phase III multicentre trial sponsoredby a National Institutes of Health Program
Project grant. However, if metastasis in the regional nodalbasin beyond a tumour-positive SN is
suspected or confirmed, regional nodal surgery beyond the SN procedureis, by definition, a
therapeutic lymph node dissection. 


Even though the chance of long-term survival is inversely related to the tumour burden within
regionalnodes, Drs Medalie and Ackerman apparently would have us wait until a patient develops
multiple palpable(and thus relatively burdensome) metastases with a concomitant decrease in the
chance of long-term survival.Since virtually all patients who have SN micrometastases detectable by
LM/SL will eventually developclinically detectable nodal metastases if managed only by wide excision
and observation, what do theypropose? Ifwe are to believe this (and ignore the available
peer-reviewed studies), even microscopic metastasisto regional lymph nodes must inevitably be
accompanied by fatal haematogenous metastasis. 


The single most important prognostic factor for most primary solid neoplasms including melanoma is
thetumour status of regional lymph nodes draining the primary neoplasm (Table 2). Until recently,
the onlymethod to identify regional node metastasis in patients without palpable lymph nodes was
ELND and pathologicalexamination of all excised nodes, usually amounting to examination of one
cross-section of each nodeby haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining. 


Only 20% of patients who haveintermediate-thickness primary melanomas and non-palpable regional
lymph nodes actually have nodal metastasisby histology, including immunohistology. 


Regional nodes were stained in a sequential and temporal fashion, andthus we identified the SN as
the first blue-stained lymph node within the lymphatic basin reached bya blue-stained afferent
lymphatic channel draining the primary lesion. 


LM/SL evolved from our hypothesisthat a primary melanoma metastasizing via the lymphatics will lodge
in the first lymph nodes on the directlymphatic drainage pathway from the primary cutaneous site,
before spreading to other nodes further alongthe lymphatic chain. 


Focused histological evaluation based on immunohistochemical staining and molecular analysis of
multiple sections of thisSN is more likely to reveal nodal metastasis than is routine H&E staining
of limited sections from the12-40 bivalved nodes identified in a conventional ELND specimen. 


The ability of even the most competentdermatopathologist to differentiate between a benign or
malignant melanocytic lesion will occasionallybe questioned when a patient with a reportedly benign
lesion subsequently develops fatal metastases (a fallibility that Drs Medalie and Ackerman accept). 


These highly significant differences in prognosis between SN-positive and SN-negative survival(P <
0.001) represent valuable information for a patient who is attempting to make an informed
decisionabout the future and explore treatment options. If the SN contains a metastasis, the chance
of survivalof 15 years or longer will be 40.70% depending upon the number of involved lymph nodes
and their tumourburden. 


During the preoperative informed-consent discussion with our patients,we state that the therapeutic
utility of LM/SL and selective CLND has not been proven at this time. However,LM/SL can indicate
with a high degree of accuracy whether the patient has nodal metastases and therebyhelp establish
the risk of recurrence. 


Multiple retrospectivesingle-institution studies lend support to Snow¡¯s approach, reporting a
survival advantage when patientswithout evidence of nodal metastasis undergo routine ELND. In fact,
randomized prospective clinical trials have failedto show an overall survival benefit for all
melanoma patients undergoing ELND, although a subset of individuals with limited tumour burden may
benefit. 


According to theincubator hypothesis, the primary tumour spreads primarily to sentinel nodes in the
regional lymph basin,where the metastatic tumour cells may survive and grow slowly or remain latent
before, in some patients,spreading to distant sites. However, according to the marker hypothesis, a
primary melanoma metastasizes simultaneously vialymphatic and haematogenous routes, so that the
presence of nodal metastases becomes a marker ratherthan a precursor of clinically relevant and
progressive systemic disease. 


Conversely, if the primary melanoma is thin, the likelihood of nodal metastasisis very small and few
such patients could benefit from early ELND. 


100 % - [(the proportion of patients without nodal micrometastases) +         (the proportion of
patientswith nodal metastases and systemic metastases) +         (the proportion of patients whose
metastaseswill never extend beyond the           regional basins and will exhibit long-termsurvival
following delayedresection          of macroscopic (palpable) nodes)] 


Therapeutic potential of lymph node dissection 


The question is not whether ELND is beneficial to all patients, but whethera particular patient is
likely to benefit because that patient has subclinical regional nodal metastasiswithout progressive
systemic metastasis. 


Of the 466 patients, 71.9% developed locoregional metastases as the first clinical manifestationof
disease spread. However, only 59% of those with regional nodal metastases subsequently developed
distantmetastases, which suggests that metastatic disease in 41% of patients was not present beyond
the regionalnodes to a degree that permitted progressive systemic growth at the time of therapeutic
lymphadenectomy.The fact that the median interval before clinicalmetastasis was longer for directly
spread distant disease than for regional nodal disease (25 monthsvs. 16 months) further suggests
that nodal metastasis precedes distant metastasis in many patients. Becausethe report of Meier¡¯s
group was based on a clinical staging protocol, there were no data on the incidenceof occult
(immunohistopathological or molecular) SN metastases in patients with direct distant diseaseor
in-transit metastatic disease. 


Removal of the regional nodes seems unlikely to affect overall survival in the presence of
substantial and progressive distant metastases, although the effect on survival ofpatients with tiny
or latent metastases remains to be determined. 


This interaction could explain the significantlyincreased number of tumour-involved nodes and
relatively unfavourable survival when CLND is delayed andthen performed to remove palpable rather
than subclinical metastases (Table 1).


After the development of substantial and progressive systemic metastases, surgical removal of the
regionalnodes should not influence the growth of distant metastases (unless these are relatively
small and composedof tumour cells susceptible to rejection by host immune defences), nor change the
long-term melanoma-specific survival. 


These factors could explain why a clinically palpable (2.3 cm) nodal metastasiscontaining more than
10 billion melanoma cells can exist without additional nodal or systemic involvement,and why
therapeutic lymph node dissection can be followed by survival of 25 years or more without
recurrence.


Therefore, LM/SL may also have therapeutic utilityin patients whose primary lesion has spread to the
regional lymph nodes, however, the presence and magnitudeof a therapeutic benefit cannot be
determined until the results of the randomized MSLT-I and II trialsare complete. 
