Patients and Methods. The median disease-free survival (DFS) was 48 months in the treatment group and 16 months in the control group (P = .04), and the median overall survival (OS) was 75 months for treated and 46 months for untreated patients (P = .03). 


Nevertheless, a great proportion of high-risk soft tissue sarcoma patients develop distant metastases during their lives. The first generation of randomized adjuvant trials have recently been reviewed and a meta-analysis performed on the basis of updated patient records. 


PATIENTS AND METHODS. 

After a positive biopsy for sarcoma, all patients underwent complete staging and programmed local treatment. The patients who satisfied all the selection criteria were then stratified and subsequently randomized to a control or chemotherapy group. Treatment started after the completion of any local treatment and/or as soon as the wound had healed (Fig 1). 


Local Treatment. 

Patients were treated with radical surgery, wide resection followed by postoperative radiation therapy, or pre-operative radiation therapy. Patients with positive or uncertain margins were evaluated for re-excision of the tumor bed before radiation therapy. After the fifth year, patients underwent yearly clinical examinations, with routine chemistry and chest x-rays performed. An interim analysis was planned when half of the patients had been enrolled. 


Local Treatment. The remaining 68 patients (65%) were treated using a limb-sparing procedure involving radiation therapy and surgery, 45 underwent surgery and postoperative radiation therapy, and 24 underwent preoperative radiation therapy and conservative surgery (Table 1). 

Seven patients (13%) did not start adjuvant treatment. One patient refused the fifth and last cycle for personal reasons, and three patients did not complete the treatment because of related toxicities (reappearance of viral uveitis, consecutive episodes of pneumonitis, and persistent leukopenia) after two, three, and four cycles, respectively. The first cycle was administered at a dose less than or equal to 50% in one patient and less than or equal to 75% in another six patients based on nonprotocol medical decisions. 

At the time of statistical analysis (November 1999), the median follow-up for the 104 patients included in the study was 59 months, 61 months in the treatment arm and 55 months in the control arm. During the follow-up period, disease recurrences were recorded in 28 of the 53 treated patients and in 32 of the 51 patients who did not undergo adjuvant therapy, 20 treated patients and 28 untreated patients died. In four patients, the first event was a synchronous local relapse with metastases (one patient in the control arm and three patients in the treatment arm). Furthermore, nine patients developed metachronous relapse at a different site (three were local relapse after a metastasis and six were distant relapses after a previous local relapse). The median overall DFS was 48 months among treated patients and 16 months in the control group. 


Local DFS. 

Overall, 13 patients had a local recurrence of disease as the first relapse without simultaneous distant metastases (four patients in the treatment arm and nine patients in the control arm, Table 4). 


Overall, patients in the treatment arm had an indication of reduction in the risk of local recurrence (P = .07). Four patients had local relapses simultaneously with metastasis (one patient in the control arm and three in the treatment arm), and another three patients developed a local relapse as the second relapse after a distant metastasis (two patients in the treatment arm and one patient in the control arm). Taking into account the overall local relapse rate (all local events observed), 11 patients in the control group and nine in the treatment group experienced local failure. The distribution between the different local treatment modalities (radical surgery, surgery and postoperative radiation therapy, and preoperative radiation therapy and surgery) was respectively, two of 16 patients, seven of 20, and two of 15 for the control group and three of 20 patients, six of 24, and zero of nine for the treatment group. 

As the first event, a total of 47 distant relapses were observed (22 single distant events in the control group and 21 in the treatment group, one synchronous distant and local event in the control group and three in the treatment group Table 4). Six additional patients (four 

in the control arm and two in the treatment arm) had a distant metastasis as a second relapse after a local relapse. Patients died from uncontrolled metastatic disease. One patient in the control group died without evidence of disease at 28 months and was considered as censored for overall survival. The median survival time was higher among patients who underwent adjuvant therapy (75 months), compared with untreated patients (46 months) (Fig 4). Furthermore, in the subgroup of 886 patients affected by extremity sarcomas, the difference in OS between treated and untreated patients was significant (P = .029), and the absolute benefit after 10 years increased to 7%. However, only high-risk patients were selected for this study. Therefore, other more favorable groups of patients have not been considered for this treatment. 


The protocol methodology included an interim analysis after half of the predefined patient population was randomized. 


The incidence of local relapse and the dismal outcome of the untreated patients are other points to be discussed. These unfavorable aspects of our study are probably related to the selection of high-risk patients only. However, between the three different local approaches there was a trend in favor of preoperative radiation therapy (two local relapse of 24 patients in the control arm, 8.3%). 


The outcome of the untreated patient group was worse than that of previous trials. This is not surprising because our patients were selected based on the worst prognostic factors. Only two previous studies, the Rizzoli17,18 and the Foundation Bergonie trials,19 used similar patient selection criteria. However, a cure seems difficult to achieve in high-risk patients, in our study population, 60% of the patients have relapsed and continue to die in both arms.

