

Patients between 18 and 65 years of age with grade 3 to 4 spindle-cell sarcomas (primary diameter >=
5 cm or any size recurrent tumor) in extremities or girdles were eligible. 


Intensified adjuvant chemotherapy had a positive impact on the DFS and OS of patients with high-risk
extremity soft tissue sarcomas at a median follow-up of 59 months. However, the vast majorities
arise from the extra-osseous and subcutaneous soft tissue of the limbs. 


The treatment of limb sarcomas mainly relies on a combined-modality approach, after the
demonstration that pre-or postoperative radiation and conservative surgery led to local control in a
high proportion of patients.4 In fact, limb-sparing procedures allow an 85% to 90% local
dis-ease-free survival (DFS) rate and demolitive surgery now represents only 5% to 10% of the
operations in comparison with the 50% survival rate of the 1960s to 1970s.


In the early 1960s, this clinical behaviour prompted the introduction of adjuvant chemotherapy
trials with the aim of increasing DFS and possibly overall survival (OS). The main findings were
statistical evidence in favor of chemotherapy for local, metastasis, and overall DFS (P = .016,
.0003, and .0001, respectively) and a trend towards increased OS (P = .12). 


Their main differences, compared with the previous studies, are the introduction of ifosfamide (IFO)
and the intensification of doses in combination with hematopoietic growth factors, and more
restricted selection criteria. Not one new study has been already reported, whereas the present
Italian co-operative study closed patient accrual in November 1996 because of the results of the
planned interim analysis.


Here we report the results of the Italian co-operative study after a median follow-up of 59 months
and a minimum time between randomization and date last seen of 28 months among patients who did not
die. The time of the analysis (November, 1999) was 36 months after the last randomization. 


The staging consisted of a computed tomography (CT) scan and/or magnetic resonance imaging of the
primary lesion, and a CT scan of the thorax, other specific tests (angiography, bone scan, CT scan
of the brain, and so on) were performed only in the case of clinical suspicion. 


Inclusion criteria were as follows, age, 18 to 65 years, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status less than or equal to 2, primary tumors subfascially localized with diameter
greater than or equal to 5 cm, high-grade spindle-cell or polymorphous sarcomas (fibrosarcoma,
malignant fibrous histiocytoma, polymorphous liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma,
malignant schwannoma, angiosarcoma, and polymorphous rhabdomyosarcoma), local relapse of any size,
no previous radio/chemotherapy, adequate bone marrow (WBC count of >= 4,000/fiL, platelets =
120.000/mL, and hemoglobin >= 10 g/dL), renal (creatinine <= 1.3 mg/dL), hepatic (SGOT <= 2.5 X
normal value and bilirubin <= 1.2 mg/dL), and pulmonary functions.   Exclusion criteria were as
follows, distant or regional lymph-node metastases, previous malignancy, medical or psychiatric
illness precluding correct written informed consent, pregnancy, uncontrolled infections, and risk of
being lost to follow-up. 


Radical surgery consisted of amputation in case of massive involvement of critical structures or
compartmental resection in highly selected patients. Preoperative radiation therapy (44.8 Gy in 28
fractions in 2.5 weeks, 160 cGy/ fraction, 2 fractions per day) followed by resection with or
without a post-or intraoperative boost (16 to 18 Gy for positive or close surgical margins) was used
for tumors extending to critical structures for which conservative surgical resection was expected
to be inadequate and amputation would usually have to be performed to obtain negative margins. 


Hydration (1,500 to 2,000 mL of fluids IV after chemotherapy), antiemetics (5-hydroxytryptamine-3
antagonists), and filgrastim (300 fig/d SC, days 8 through 15) were routinely administered. In the
case of incomplete hematologic recovery (defined as WBC < 4,000/mL and platelets [PLTS] <
100.000/mL), treatment was postponed by one or more weeks, furthermore, on complete hematologic
recovery, a dose reduction of EPI was applied depending on the observed nadirs (WBC > 1,000/mL and
PLTS > 75.000/mL, IFO and EPI doses both 100%, WBC > 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and
EPI dose 75%, WBC < 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and EPI dose 50%). 


Physical examinations, routine chemistry, and x-ray of the thorax and bones underlying the primary
site were performed every 2 months and a CT scan of the thorax was performed every 6 months for the
first 2 years. 


All centers faxed protocol-specific eligibility checklists to the statistics office in Aviano,
patients were stratified using a four-block stratification by primary tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >=
10 cm) and recurrent tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and randomized to treatment or control
groups. 


The study period was calculated from randomization to the first occurrence of the considered events
(local recurrence alone, metastasis with or without local recurrence, death due to disease, toxic
death). 


Seven patients (13%) did not start adjuvant treatment. 


One patient refused the fifth and last cycle for personal reasons, and three patients did not
complete the treatment because of related toxicities (reappearance of viral uveitis, consecutive
episodes of pneumonitis, and persistent leukopenia) after two, three, and four cycles, respectively.
The average median relative dose-intensity (DI) of the program was 83.3% (Table 2), 63% of the
cycles were given at a DI of >= 80% and 48% at a DI of >= 90%. 


From the third cycle, grade 4 leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were less frequent because of the
applied dose reductions, and anemia became the most important hematologic side effect, requiring
repeated packed red cell transfusions in 24% of the patients. 


The nonhematologic toxicities were reversible alopecia (100% of cases), grade 3 mucositis (10% of
cases), and grade 3 nausea and vomiting (3% of cases). 


Univariate analyses did not reveal any statistically significant difference in overall DFS and OS
for any of the characteristics considered (age, sex, center of surgery, histology, grading, site of
primary tumor, presentation, diameter, local treatment, and stratification) with the exception of
adjuvant treatment (data not shown). 


Because none of the patient characteristics was associated with the end point at the time of
univariate analysis, unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
computed by means of the Cox proportional hazards model. 


The absolute improvement deriving from chemotherapy was 27% at 2 years (72% and 45% in the treatment
and control arms, respectively, P = .003), and 13% at 4 years (50% and 37%, respectively, P = .19)
(Table 5). 


The cumulative incidence function estimates at 2 years were 0% and 10% for the treatment and the
control arms, respectively (P = .02), and at 4 years, they were 6% and 17%, respectively (P = .09)
(Table 5). 


Taking into account the overall local relapse rate (all local events observed), 11 patients in the
control group and nine in the treatment group experienced local failure. 


Six additional patients (four in the control arm and two in the treatment arm) had a distant
metastasis as a second relapse after a local relapse. 


The preliminary data of previous studies were sometimes positive for DFS and OS,15-19 but further
analyses, made after an adequate follow-up time, indicated a disappearance of the positive effect of
chemotherapy on 20,21 and, in some cases, worse results.22 However, the recently published
meta-analysis,7 involving 1,568 patients, showed a statistically significant benefit for treated
patients of 6%, 10%, and 10% for local, metastatic, and overall DFS, respectively, and a favorable
(but not statistically significant) trend in OS (4%), after a median of 9.4 years of follow-up. 


In fact, disease stages, tumor sizes, and grading varied greatly.23 Second, eight studies made use
of a polychemotherapy including an anthracycline, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and dacarbazine,
but only the first is active in soft tissue sarcomas, the others probably increased toxicity. Third,
six studies used doxorubicin as a single agent at doses ranging from 60 to 90 mg/m2 per cycle (total
doses of 420 to 540 mg/m2), whereas the per cycle and total doxorubicin doses in the
polychemotherapy studies were 50 to 90 mg/m2 and 200 to 550 mg/m2, respectively, indicating possible
underdosing of the principal active agent. 


Although these first-generation trials are no longer the gold standards, the meta-analysis did
reveal a number of elements that suggested a positive role of adjuvant chemotherapy. 


It is directly derived from consecutive phase I-II dose-intensification trials carried out at the
Centro di Riferimento Oncologico of Aviano.27,31 The epirubicin dose level of 60 mg/m2 X 2 days
represents the step before the maximum-tolerated dose established in those trials (70 mg/m2
epirubicin X 2 days) when given in combination with fixed full doses of ifosfamide (1.8 g/m2/d X 5
days) in advanced cases of soft tissue sarcoma. 


The serial hematologic evaluations made during the median follow-up of 3 years confirmed the
complete recovery of hematopoietic functions. 


Moreover, this treatment option5,32,33 was chosen for those patients presenting with locally
far-advanced disease or with disease approaching critical structures (nerves and vessels), therefore
a high incidence of local relapse could be foreseen. 


Nevertheless, a significant delay in relapse and death, as observed in our treatment group, is
worthwhile and cost-effective in young patients, also taking into account the shortness of the
treatment and the absence of toxic death. 
