 One hundred four patients were randomized, 51 to the control group and 53 to the treatment group (five cycles of 4'-epidoxorubicin 60 mg/m2 days 1 and 2 and ifosfamide 1.8 g/m2 days 1 through 5, with hydration, mesna, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor). After a median follow-up of 59 months, 60 patients had relapsed and 48 died (28 and 20 in the treatment arm and 32 and 28 in the control arm, respectively). The median disease-free survival (DFS) was 48 months in the treatment group and 16 months in the control group (P = .04), and the median overall survival (OS) was 75 months for treated and 46 months for untreated patients (P = .03).  Statistical Considerations   On the basis of the estimated proportions of patients free from metastatic disease 2 years after diagnosis (60% in the treated group v 40% in the control group), it was estimated that 95 patients were required per arm (beta = 0.80, alpha = 0.05).   All centers faxed protocol-specific eligibility checklists to the statistics office in Aviano, patients were stratified using a four-block stratification by primary tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and recurrent tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and randomized to treatment or control groups. One patient refused the fifth and last cycle for personal reasons, and three patients did not complete the treatment because of related toxicities (reappearance of viral uveitis, consecutive episodes of pneumonitis, and persistent leukopenia) after two, three, and four cycles, respectively. The first cycle was administered at a dose less than or equal to 50% in one patient and less than or equal to 75% in another six patients based on nonprotocol medical decisions. At the time of statistical analysis (November 1999), the median follow-up for the 104 patients included in the study was 59 months, 61 months in the treatment arm and 55 months in the control arm. During the follow-up period, disease recurrences were recorded in 28 of the 53 treated patients and in 32 of the 51 patients who did not undergo adjuvant therapy, 20 treated patients and 28 untreated patients died. In four patients, the first event was a synchronous local relapse with metastases (one patient in the control arm and three patients in the treatment arm). Overall, 13 patients had a local recurrence of disease as the first relapse without simultaneous distant metastases (four patients in the treatment arm and nine patients in the control arm, Table 4). Four patients had local relapses simultaneously with metastasis (one patient in the control arm and three in the treatment arm), and another three patients developed a local relapse as the second relapse after a distant metastasis (two patients in the treatment arm and one patient in the control arm). Taking into account the overall local relapse rate (all local events observed), 11 patients in the control group and nine in the treatment group experienced local failure. The distribution between the different local treatment modalities (radical surgery, surgery and postoperative radiation therapy, and preoperative radiation therapy and surgery) was respectively, two of 16 patients, seven of 20, and two of 15 for the control group and three of 20 patients, six of 24, and zero of nine for the treatment group. As the first event, a total of 47 distant relapses were observed (22 single distant events in the control group and 21 in the treatment group, one synchronous distant and local event in the control group and three in the treatment group Table 4). Six additional patients (four  in the control arm and two in the treatment arm) had a distant metastasis as a second relapse after a local relapse. The median survival time was higher among patients who underwent adjuvant therapy (75 months), compared with untreated patients (46 months) (Fig 4). The preliminary data of previous studies were sometimes positive for DFS and OS,15-19 but further analyses, made after an adequate follow-up time, indicated a disappearance of the positive effect of chemotherapy on 20,21 and, in some cases, worse results.22 However, the recently published meta-analysis,7 involving 1,568 patients, showed a statistically significant benefit for treated patients of 6%, 10%, and 10% for local, metastatic, and overall DFS, respectively, and a favorable (but not statistically significant) trend in OS (4%), after a median of 9.4 years of follow-up. Furthermore, in the subgroup of 886 patients  affected by extremity sarcomas, the difference in OS between treated and untreated patients was significant (P = .029), and the absolute benefit after 10 years increased to 7%. This maximum-tolerated dose gave 13 responses of 13 assessable patients, but induced relevant toxicities.31 Therefore, in the present study, the age of the patients was limited to 65 years, the number of cycles was limited to five, and a predefined dose reduction scheme was established to reduce the dose of anthracycline depending on the level of leukopenia reached during the previous cycle. In fact, despite the routine use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, grade 4 leukopenia was observed in 28% of the administered cycles, neutropenic fever in 13% of the patients (16 episodes out of 223 cycles, 7.2%), and anemia requiring multiple transfusions occurred in 24% of the patients.   The main finding of the intention-to-treat analysis in this study is the beneficial impact of chemotherapy on the DFS (P = .04) and OS (P = .03) for patients affected by high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas and treated with chemotherapy.   Questions regarding the adequacy of the surgical approach and consequently the adequacy of margins could be raised, but only 10 patients were treated outside of referral centers and only two of those patients had local relapses. However, a cure seems difficult to achieve in high-risk patients, in our study population, 60% of the patients have relapsed and continue to die in both arms. Nevertheless, a significant delay in relapse and death, as observed in our treatment group, is worthwhile and cost-effective in young patients, also taking into account the shortness of the treatment and the absence of toxic death.
