ALTHOUGH MANY PATIENTS with carcinoma of the uterine cervix are cured with local measures a substantial minority recur or present with metastases and are potential candidates for systemic therapy. Unfortunatelythe list of active drugs is short and combinations have not shown a consistent improvement over single agents. A phase II study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group GOG demonstrated activity formitolactol as a single agent in cervical cancer using 180mg/m/d for 10 days by mouth in repeated 4-week cycles.There were 55 assessable patients with one CR and 15 partial responses PRs 29 response rate. A pilot study used mitolactol plus cisplatin and established a tolerable dose schedule of 180 mg/m of mitolactoldaily for 5 days with cisplatin 50 mg/m. Although an intermediate dose level 50 mg/m cisplatin and 225mg/m mitolactol daily for 5 days was considered it wasnot pursued since six of 10 patients at the first dose level in the pilot study required dose reductions and/or delays with re-treatment. Treatment of cervix cancer with the combination of ifosfamide cisplatin and bleomycin yielded a 69 response rate 49 patients in one series. The result was impressive but the importance of bleomycin was unclear and its toxicity sometimes troublesome so we proposed to compare cisplatin alone versus a regimen of cisplatinplus mitolactol C M and a regimen of cisplatin plusifosfamide and mesna CIFX. Eligible patients included women with histologically confirmed advanced stage IVB recurrent or persistent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix not suitable for curative treatment with surgery and/or radiotherapy. The null hypothesis was rejected if the probability of the observed result or a more extreme result under the null hypothesis was less than 0.025 one-tail test.A linear logistic model was used to adjust for age PS and whether cisplatin had been used as a radiosensitizer. Peripheral P .013 and central neurotoxicity P .001 were both significantly more frequent and severe with CIFX compared with cisplatin alone Table 3 but not so for C M. PFS Fig 1 adjusted for age PS and prior cisplatinas a radiosensitizer was statistically significantly longer for CIFX median 4.6 v 3.2 months compared with cisplatin alone P .003 however there was no difference between C M and cisplatin alone. There was no significant difference in survival between cisplatin and either of the combination regimens medianmonths: cisplatin 8.0 C M 7.3 CIFX 8.3 P .835 Fig 2. Initial PS not shown was also associated with survival PS 0 was favorable P .001 the median durations of survival for PS 0 1 and 2 were 10.0 7.4and 6.8 months respectively. The results of this trial in cervix cancer reflect a common set of findings in combination chemotherapy of advanced solid tumors namely a higher response rate but not a high CR rate with a combination compared with single-agent therapy at the cost of more toxicity and no survival benefit. A phase II trial of bleomycin plus ifosfamide plus cisplatin that used the same dose schedules of CIFX as in the present trial achieved a 20 CR rate. Since the role of bleomycin in cervix cancer is unclear but implies restricting therapy to patients with good pulmonary function we elected not to include bleomycinin the present study. The pilot study on which the C M arm of the present trial was based identified 180 mg/m for 5 days as the maximum-tolerated dose in combination with cisplatin. Although we are not aware of such complications in the present trial the possible risk of secondary malignancies plus the failure to show an improvement in outcome for C M would suggest a limited future for mitolactol in the treatment of cervix cancer. A survival benefit was reported in a small trial 25 patients in favor of cisplatin plus methotrexate over hydroxyureabut prerandomization was used PS was not accounted for and there may have been other imbalances in the treatment arms that could account for the difference in outcome. Cisplatin alone has limited value in advanced cervix cancer we are not aware of a randomized trial of cisplatin versus supportive care. One of the earlier GOG trials showed an improved overall response rate 31.4 v 20.7 P .015 with double-dose cisplatin 100 mg/m2 but no improvement in CR rate PFI or survival. 
