
   AFTER AN INITIAL WAVE of success, the treatment of advanced breast cancer has plateaued. Combination chemotherapy is capable of inducing objective responses in 60% to 70% of cases, but only 10% to 15% of these are complete responses.' When seen, response durations are relatively short, in the range of 10 to 12 months. Hormonal therapy produces responses in 25% to 30% of unselected patients, with median response durations in the same range. However, the frequency of hormonal responses can be increased significantly by selecting patients whose tumors contain specific cytosolic receptors for estrogen or progesterone or both. 
   Although complete responses can be seen with both forms of therapy, there are few cures of breast cancer once metastases have been demonstrated. If it were assumed that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of their estrogen receptor (ER) content, ie, composed of ER positive (ER +) and ER negative (ER -) cells in various proportions, then they may have a differential response to endocrine and cytotoxic chemotherapy. The differential responses of ER + and ER -cells to hormonal therapy has been well documented. 7' 8 However, it is not clear that there is a differential response of ER + and ER - cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Using a monoclonal antibody specific to human breast cancer ER, King et al documented tumor heterogeneity in terms of ER content." Using a similar technique Nenci was able to demonstrate that breast tumors are rarely composed of homogeneous cell types, ie, almost all breast cancers are composed of mixed receptor-positive and receptor-negative cell populations in variable proportions. Nenci also found that positivity of 20% of the cells was sufficient to give a positive ER by cytosolic assay. The rationale for combining hormonal therapy with cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumption that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cells to hormonal and chemotherapy. It is also assumed that neither chemotherapy nor hormonal therapy will interfere with action of the other form of treatment so that the response rates for the combination will be at least additive, and not antagonistic. 
   With this theoretical background, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) designed protocol 8081 to determine if the addition of a hormonally active agent (tamoxifen) would enhance the response rate, response duration, and survival of women with advanced breast cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. A previous CALGB study demonstrated that the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin, Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), vincristine, and prednisone (CAFVP) or CAF were each superior to the widely used combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF). The same study also confirmed that CAF was less toxic than CAFVP. CAF was therefore selected as the chemotherapy for CALGB 8081. Tamoxifen was chosen as the hormonal agent because of its demonstrated efficacy in postmenopausal women with breast cancer and its relative lack of toxicity. 
   Patients were prospectively randomized after stratification by ER content, menopausal status, dominant site of metastatic disease, and prior adjuvant chemotherapy. CALGB 8081 opened for patient entry on February 1, 1980 and closed on August 1, 1982. Preliminary data have been previously reported. This constitutes the final report. 
   MATERIALS AND METHODSPatient EligibilityEligibility requirements for this study included histologically documented carcinoma of the breast that was locally recurrent, metastatic or surgically incurable (stage III or IV), measurable disease, a CALGB performance score of 3 or less, and age < 75 years. Any radiation therapy must have been completed at least 3 weeks earlier. Patients had to have a WBC count of > 4,000/pL, platelets > 100,000/L, a blood urea nitrogen level of <20 mg/dL, serum creatinine of < 1.5 mg/dL, and normal values for SGOT and bilirubin, unless abnormal values resulted from metastatic involvement. Patients who had received prior ajuvant chemotherapy were eligible if it had been discontinued for at least 6 months at the time of protocol entry. 
   TreatmentAfter appropriate stratification, patients were randomized to receive either chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (Fig 1). Chemotherapy was administered in 28-day cycles--a 14-day period of drug administration followed by a 14-day restperiod. 
   Chemotherapy was not withheld when patients required such irradiation. 
   Statistical MethodsDifferences in distributions of duration of response, time to treatment failure, and survival time were evaluated using a Cox proportional hazard multivariate model19 or, univariately, the log rank test. Medians and survival curves were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. 
   Time to treatment failure (TTF), survival, and duration of response were significantly longer for bone-only patients (Figs 2 and 3). 
   Duration of Response, Time to Treatment Failure, SurvivalDuration of response was defined as the time from response to relapse, death, or the date the patient was last seen (if the patient was still responding). Survival was measured from randomization to death or the date last seen. 
   The overall median survival was 19.6 months (Fig 6). Survival distributions did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups (medians, 20.6 and 19.9 months, P = .76). 
   However, TTF, response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients (P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively) (Fig 7). 
   Tamoxifen did not enhance the response rate, response duration or survival in ER + patients over CAF alone. Our ER + and ER - cases had identical response rates (56%) to chemotherapy (CAF), but ER + patients had significantly longer response durations (P = .00015), TTF (P = .0061), and survival (P = .0058) than ER- patients (Fig 5). 
   A lack of differential response of ER + cells to chemotherapy may explain the lack of additive effect in ER + patients when chemotherapy and hormonal therapy are used concurrently. 
   However, to date, there have been no convincing data that the addition of hormonal therapy has enhanced the response rate, response duration, or survival over chemotherapy alone. The use of short-term cyclophosphamidewith estrogen also did not prolong response duration or survival. 
   More recent trials such as that reported by Cocconi et al and Viladiu et al seemed to show some benefit in response rate to combined chemohormonal therapy, but in neither trial was a survival advantage confirmed. Krook et al were unable to demonstrate that the addition of tamoxifen to CFP (cyclophosphamide + 5-FU + prednisone) improved time to disease progression or survival over treatment with CFP alone. 
   However, each of these trials was designed to evaluate hormonal therapy with or without chemotherapy, rather than chemotherapy with or without hormonal therapy. Lastly, Kiang et al randomized 40 ER + postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer to estrogen therapywith diethylstilbesterol (DES) or DES + chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and 5-FU (CF). The survival of 21 ER + patients treated with combined DES + CF was significantly longer than 19 ER + treated with DES followed by chemotherapy after relapse or treatment failure. 
   Pain "flares" are sometimes seen with successful hormonal or chemotherapy but Coombes et al" found that pain relief was the most consistent index of response to treatment, since nearly all responding patients with bone metastases eventually became pain free. 
   As confirmed in this study, patients with only bone metastases frequently have a prolonged chronic course, and have a significantly longer survival than patients with visceral metastases. 