
   AFTER AN INITIAL WAVE of success, the treatment of advanced breast cancer has plateaued. Combination chemotherapy is capable of inducing objective responses in 60% to 70% of cases, but only 10% to 15% of these are complete responses.' When seen, response durations are relatively short, in the range of 10 to 12 months. Hormonal therapy produces responses in 25% to 30% of unselected patients, with median response durations in the same range. However, the frequency of hormonal responses can be increased significantly by selecting patients whose tumors contain specific cytosolic receptors for estrogen or progesterone or both. 
   Although complete responses can be seen with both forms of therapy, there are few cures of breast cancer once metastases have been demonstrated. If it were assumed that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of their estrogen receptor (ER) content, ie, composed of ER positive (ER +) and ER negative (ER -) cells in various proportions, then they may have a differential response to endocrine and cytotoxic chemotherapy. The differential responses of ER + and ER -cells to hormonal therapy has been well documented. 7' 8 However, it is not clear that there is a differential response of ER + and ER - cells to cytotoxic chemotherapy. Using a monoclonal antibody specific to human breast cancer ER, King et al documented tumor heterogeneity in terms of ER content." Using a similar technique Nenci was able to demonstrate that breast tumors are rarely composed of homogeneous cell types, ie, almost all breast cancers are composed of mixed receptor-positive and receptor-negative cell populations in variable proportions. Nenci also found that positivity of 20% of the cells was sufficient to give a positive ER by cytosolic assay. The rationale for combining hormonal therapy with cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumption that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cells to hormonal and chemotherapy. It is also assumed that neither chemotherapy nor hormonal therapy will interfere with action of the other form of treatment so that the response rates for the combination will be at least additive, and not antagonistic. 
   With this theoretical background, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) designed protocol 8081 to determine if the addition of a hormonally active agent (tamoxifen) would enhance the response rate, response duration, and survival of women with advanced breast cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. A previous CALGB study demonstrated that the combination of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (Adriamycin, Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), vincristine, and prednisone (CAFVP) or CAF were each superior to the widely used combination of cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF). 
   Statistical MethodsDifferences in distributions of duration of response, time to treatment failure, and survival time were evaluated using a Cox proportional hazard multivariate model19 or, univariately, the log rank test. Differences in response frequencies and patient characteristics were evaluated using a multivariate linear logistic model, or, univariately, the chi square test.  Medians and survival curves were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. 
   This difference was not statistically significant (P = .08). The difference between the total (CR and PR) response rates-TCAF, 64% v CAF, 55%-was also not statistically significant (P = .09). 
   Univariately, there were no significant differences in response rates according to menopausal status or ER status. Patients with soft tissue disease had a higher response rate than those with visceral or osseous disease (P = .05), and patients with better performance status at entry had a higher responserate (P = .02). 
   Among postmenopausal patients, the response rates between TCAF (62%) and CAF (53%) were not significantly different (P = .12), nor was there a significant difference in response among ER + patients to TCAF (67%) v CAF (56%), P = .22. However, among patients with soft tissue disease, TCAF produced a higher response rate than CAF (88%, 58%, P = .009). 
   Response rates (CR and PR) for bone-only patients were significantly lower than for other patients (35% v 59%, P = .013, chi square test). 
   Time to treatment failure (TTF), survival, and duration of response were significantly longer for bone-only patients (Figs 2 and 3). No differences were found between the CAF and TCAF regimens, although the sample size was very small. 
   Duration of Response, Time to Treatment Failure, SurvivalDuration of response was defined as the time from response to relapse, death, or the date the patient was last seen (if the patient was still responding). Survival was measured from randomization to death or the date last seen. 
   There were no significant differences in durations of response according to dominant site of metastases or menopausal status. There was no significant difference in duration of response by treatment (TCAF v CAF) in ER + patients. Response rate and response duration of ER - patients treated with CAF or TCAF were not significantly different, ie, there was no detrimental effect of tamoxifen in ER - patients. 
   The overall median survival was 19.6 months (Fig 6). Survival distributions did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups (medians, 20.6 and 19.9 months, P = .76). There were no significant differences according to menopausal status (P = .75). 
   When the 190 evaluable patients receiving CAF were analyzed by ER status (Table 7), there was no significant difference in response rate between ER + and ER - tumors (56%). However, TTF, response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients (P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively) (Fig 7). 
   Tamoxifen did not enhance the response rate, response duration or survival in ER + patients over CAF alone. Clearly, there is a differential response of ER + v ER - cells to hormonal therapy with at least some ER + cells responsive and ER - cells resistant. The secondary question asked by this study was whether there is a differential response of ER + v ER- tumors to chemotherapy. Our ER + and ER - cases had identical response rates (56%) to chemotherapy (CAF), but ER + patients had significantly longer response durations (P = .00015), TTF (P = .0061), and survival (P = .0058) than ER- patients (Fig 5). 
   Clearly, the assumption that there is a differential response of ER + v ER- patients to chemotherapy is not correct. 
   However, to date, there have been no convincing data that the addition of hormonal therapy has enhanced the response rate, response duration, or survival over chemotherapy alone. The postoophorectomy studies of VanDyke and Falkson did show an enhanced response rate to combination treatment, but response rates were not greater than that reported for chemotherapy alone. The use of short-term cyclophosphamidewith estrogen also did not prolong response duration or survival. 
   More recent trials such as that reported by Cocconi et al and Viladiu et al seemed to show some benefit in response rate to combined chemohormonal therapy, but in neither trial was a survival advantage confirmed. Krook et al were unable to demonstrate that the addition of tamoxifen to CFP (cyclophosphamide + 5-FU + prednisone) improved time to disease progression or survival over treatment with CFP alone. 
   The survival of 21 ER + patients treated with combined DES + CF was significantly longer than 19 ER + treated with DES followed by chemotherapy after relapse or treatment failure. 
   As confirmed in this study, patients with only bone metastases frequently have a prolonged chronic course, and have a significantly longer survival than patients with visceral metastases. 