
   AFTER AN INITIAL WAVE of success, the treatment of advanced breast cancer has plateaued. Combination chemotherapy is capable of inducing objective responses in 60% to 70% of cases, but only 10% to 15% of these are complete responses.' When seen, response durations are relatively short, in the range of 10 to 12 months. 
   The rationale for combining hormonal therapy with cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumption that breast cancers are heterogeneous in terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cells to hormonal and chemotherapy. It is also assumed that neither chemotherapy nor hormonal therapy will interfere with action of the other form of treatment so that the response rates for the combination will be at least additive, and not antagonistic. 
   With this theoretical background, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) designed protocol 8081 to determine if the addition of a hormonally active agent (tamoxifen) would enhance the response rate, response duration, and survival of women with advanced breast cancer treated with combination chemotherapy. 
   Patients who had received prior ajuvant chemotherapy were eligible if it had been discontinued for at least 6 months at the time of protocol entry. 
   TreatmentAfter appropriate stratification, patients were randomized to receive either chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (Fig 1). Chemotherapy was administered in 28-day cycles--a 14-day period of drug administration followed by a 14-day restperiod. 
   Chemotherapy was not withheld when patients required such irradiation. 
   Statistical MethodsDifferences in distributions of duration of response, time to treatment failure, and survival time were evaluated using a Cox proportional hazard multivariate model19 or, univariately, the log rank test. Medians and survival curves were estimated by the Kaplan-Meier method. 
   Time to treatment failure (TTF), survival, and duration of response were significantly longer for bone-only patients (Figs 2 and 3). 
   Duration of Response, Time to Treatment Failure, SurvivalDuration of response was defined as the time from response to relapse, death, or the date the patient was last seen (if the patient was still responding). Survival was measured from randomization to death or the date last seen. 
   The overall median survival was 19.6 months (Fig 6). Survival distributions did not differ significantly between the two treatment groups (medians, 20.6 and 19.9 months, P = .76). 
   However, TTF, response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients (P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively) (Fig 7). 
   Tamoxifen did not enhance the response rate, response duration or survival in ER + patients over CAF alone. Our ER + and ER - cases had identical response rates (56%) to chemotherapy (CAF), but ER + patients had significantly longer response durations (P = .00015), TTF (P = .0061), and survival (P = .0058) than ER- patients (Fig 5). 
   A lack of differential response of ER + cells to chemotherapy may explain the lack of additive effect in ER + patients when chemotherapy and hormonal therapy are used concurrently. 
   However, to date, there have been no convincing data that the addition of hormonal therapy has enhanced the response rate, response duration, or survival over chemotherapy alone. The use of short-term cyclophosphamidewith estrogen also did not prolong response duration or survival. 
   More recent trials such as that reported by Cocconi et al and Viladiu et al seemed to show some benefit in response rate to combined chemohormonal therapy, but in neither trial was a survival advantage confirmed. Krook et al were unable to demonstrate that the addition of tamoxifen to CFP (cyclophosphamide + 5-FU + prednisone) improved time to disease progression or survival over treatment with CFP alone. 
   However, each of these trials was designed to evaluate hormonal therapy with or without chemotherapy, rather than chemotherapy with or without hormonal therapy. Lastly, Kiang et al randomized 40 ER + postmenopausal women with advanced breast cancer to estrogen therapywith diethylstilbesterol (DES) or DES + chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and 5-FU (CF). The survival of 21 ER + patients treated with combined DES + CF was significantly longer than 19 ER + treated with DES followed by chemotherapy after relapse or treatment failure. 
   Pain "flares" are sometimes seen with successful hormonal or chemotherapy but Coombes et al" found that pain relief was the most consistent index of response to treatment, since nearly all responding patients with bone metastases eventually became pain free. 
   As confirmed in this study, patients with only bone metastases frequently have a prolonged chronic course, and have a significantly longer survival than patients with visceral metastases. 