

Using a similar technique Nenci was able to demonstrate that breast tumors are rarely composed of
homogeneous cell types, ie, almost all breast cancers are composed of mixed receptor-positive and
receptor-negative cell populations in variable proportions. The rationale for combining hormonal
therapy with cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumption that breast cancers are heterogeneous
in terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cells to
hormonal and chemotherapy. 


With this theoretical background, Cancer and Leukemia Group B (CALGB) designed protocol 8081 to
determine if the addition of a hormonally active agent (tamoxifen) would enhance the response rate,
response duration, and survival of women with advanced breast cancer treated with combination
chemotherapy. A previous CALGB study demonstrated that the combination of cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin (Adriamycin, Adria Laboratories, Columbus, OH), 5-fluorouracil (5-FU), vincristine, and
prednisone (CAFVP) or CAF were each superior to the widely used combination of cyclophosphamide,
methotrexate, and 5-FU (CMF). 


MATERIALS AND METHODSPatient EligibilityEligibility requirements for this study included
histologically documented carcinoma of the breast that was locally recurrent, metastatic or
surgically incurable (stage III or IV), measurable disease, a CALGB performance score of 3 or less,
and age < 75 years. Patients had to have a WBC count of > 4,000/pL, platelets > 100,000/L, a blood
urea nitrogen level of <20 mg/dL, serum creatinine of < 1.5 mg/dL, and normal values for SGOT and
bilirubin, unless abnormal values resulted from metastatic involvement. Patients were ineligible if
they did not satisfy all the above criteria or if they had a second primary neoplasm other than
cured basal cell carcinoma of the skin or carcinoma in situ of the cervix. They were also excluded
if they had medical or psychiatric disease that would not permit the patient to give informed
consent or undergo therapy. 


Stratification and RandomizationPatients were randomized from within 13 strata based on ER status
(negative, positive, or unknown), dominant site of disease (visceral or nonvisceral), prior adjuvant
chemotherapy or hormonal therapy, and menopausal status (pre- or postmenopausal) as follows, the
postmenopausal patients were divided into 12 strata based on the other three factors, and the
premenopausal patients were a single stratum (Table 1). 


The protocol recommended the use of the dextran-coated charcoal ER assay. 


Soft tissue disease was defined as local recurrence in the skin or lymph nodes or inoperable (stage
IV) breast cancer. 


Dose calculations were based on the patient's ideal body weight or actualweight, whichever was
lower. 


For bony metastases, a PR meant partial recalcification of osteolytic lesions without the
development of new lesions. Stable disease (stable) was a reduction in tumor size of < 50% or an
increase < 25% over the original measurements. For bone lesions, this meant no change. 


Progressive disease (PD) indicated the appearance of new lesions subsequently proven to be
metastases. 


Statistical MethodsDifferences in distributions of duration of response, time to treatment failure,
and survival time were evaluated using a Cox proportional hazard multivariate model19 or,
univariately, the log rank test. Differences in response frequencies and patient characteristics
were evaluated using a multivariate linear logistic model, or, univariately, the chi square test.  


Roughly one third of the patients were ER-, one third ER +, and one third ER unknown in each arm of
the protocol. Seventy-seven percent of the patients on the CAF regimen and 75% of those on the TCAF
regimen had a performance score of 0 or 1.


Comparability of Groups (Patient Characteristics),Nonmeasurable DiseaseWhen compared with the 379
patients in the main analysis, the 26 patients with "bone-only" disease were more likely to have had
prior radiotherapy (50% v 29%, P = .03, chi square test). 


Response Four patients were considered inevaluable for the response analysis due to error,
inadequate records, or hip fracture. 


When treatment was added to the model, the P value was .15 for the significance of treatment regimen
while controlling for performance status.


However, more of the bone-only patients achieved stable disease or subjective improvement, and none
had progression as the best response. 


No differences were found between the CAF and TCAF regimens, although the sample size was very
small.


In a multivariate Cox proportional hazards model, the following significant prognostic factors
relating to TTF were identified, performance status (0 better than 1,2,3, P = .02), number of
disease sites (one better than two or more, P = .037), and ER status (negative worse than positive
or unknown, P = .00006). 


The overall median survival was 19.6 months (Fig 6). Two factors were prognostic for survival in a
univariate analysis, dominant site of disease with visceral worse than osseous or soft tissue
(medians, 18.3, 22.8, 22.0 months, P = .05), and ER status with negative worse than positive or
unknown (medians, 15.8, 24.9, 23.1 months, P<.0001). 


A secondary objective of this study was to evaluate prospectively the response of ER + v ER - tumors
to CAF chemotherapy. When the 190 evaluable patients receiving CAF were analyzed by ER status (Table
7), there was no significant difference in response rate between ER + and ER - tumors (56%). 


ToxicityToxicity data were available on 375 of 379 cases (98.9% of cases entered) and are displayed
in Table 8. There were three early deaths and one patient had treatment withheld after a hip
fracture. Both programs produced equivalent incidences of leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, nausea and
vomiting, and infection. 


DISCUSSIONOur data demonstrate that there is no significant benefit to adding tamoxifen to CAF
chemotherapy in the treatment of advanced breast cancer. Do cytotoxic chemotherapy and hormonal
therapy compete for the same pool of ER + cells? Lippman et al retrospectively analyzed 70 patients
with metastatic breast cancer treated with chemotherapy. 24 Objective responses were seen in 34 of
45 (75%) ER- (< 10 fmol/mg) patients, but only three of 25 (12%) of ER + (--10 fmol/mg) cases
responded (P<.0001). 


Combining chemotherapy with hormonal therapy is not a new idea, the first clinical trials were
reported over 15 years ago. 


Serial bone scans may be helpful, but bone scans improve slowly, thus rendering this technique of
greater value in documenting treatment failure rather than response. Pain "flares" are sometimes
seen with successful hormonal or chemotherapy but Coombes et al" found that pain relief was the most
consistent index of response to treatment, since nearly all responding patients with bone metastases
eventually became pain free.


TTF inherently incorporates deterioration of performance status and increased pain as well as more
objective criteria such as progression on the bone scan.
