Hormonal therapy produces responses in 25% to 30% of unselected patients, with median response durations in the same range. However, the frequency of hormonal responses can be increased significantly by selecting patients whose tumors contain specific cytosolic receptors for estrogen or progesterone or both. 
Patients who relapsed while receiving adjuvant therapy or who had been previously treated with chemotherapy or tamoxifen for metastatic disease were ineligible. 


Treatment 

After appropriate stratification, patients were randomized to receive either chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus tamoxifen (Fig 1). Patients in regimen 1 also received tamoxifen, 10 mg, twice daily continuously (TCAF). Chemotherapy was not withheld when patients required such irradiation. 


Patients were evaluated after two courses (8 weeks) of therapy. If progressive disease was evident, the patient was considered a treatment failure and taken off protocol. Responding patients and those with stable disease continued on therapy until there was evidence of tumor progression or prohibitive drug toxicity. Differences in response frequencies and patient characteristics were evaluated using a multivariate linear logistic model, or, univariately, the chi square test. Originally,the protocol was open only to postmenopausal patients, but an addendum in April 1980 permitted the entry of premenopausal patients as well. Nearly two thirds of the patients had visceral disease. 


Response 

Four patients were considered inevaluable for the response analysis due to error, inadequate records, or hip fracture. Among 375 patients, CRs were seen in 47 (25%) of patients treated with TCAF and 34 (18%) of patients treated with CAF (Table 4). PRs were seen in 71 (38%) TCAF patients and 71 (37%) patients on CAF. 


The best response by selected patient characteristics is shown in Table 5. Univariately, there were no significant differences in response rates according to menopausal status or ER status. Patients with soft tissue disease had a higher response rate than those with visceral or osseous disease (P = .05), and patients with better performance status at entry had a higher response 

rate (P = .02). 


Among postmenopausal patients, the response rates between TCAF (62%) and CAF (53%) were not significantly different (P = .12), nor was there a significant difference in response among ER + patients to TCAF (67%) v CAF (56%); P = .22. However, among patients with soft tissue disease, TCAF produced a higher response rate than CAF (88%, 58%; P = .009). 


Response rates (CR and PR) for bone-only patients were significantly lower than for other patients (35% v 59%; P = .013, chi square test). If the difficulty of assessing response for the bone-only patients was taken into account, then bone-only patients were equally responsive to therapy (Table 6). 


Time to treatment failure (TTF), survival, and duration of response were significantly longer for bone-only patients (Figs 2 and 3). 


Duration of Response, Time to Treatment Failure, Survival 

Duration of response was defined as the time from response to relapse, death, or the date the patient was last seen (if the patient was still responding). The duration of response did not differ significantly between the TCAF and the CAF treatment programs. Univariately, regardless of treatment (TCAF v CAF), ER positivity was significantly related to the duration of response, with ER + and ER unknown patients responding longer than ER - patients (Fig 5). There were no significant differences in durations of response according to dominant site of metastases or menopausal status. There was no significant difference in duration of response by treatment (TCAF v CAF) in ER + patients. Thus, the addition of tamoxifen failed to increase response duration of ER + patients treated with CAF chemotherapy. Response rate and response duration of ER - patients treated with CAF or TCAF were not significantly different, ie, there was no detrimental effect of tamoxifen in ER - patients. Among ER+ patients, TTF by treatment (TCAF v CAF) did not differ significantly (P = .71). Among ER + patients, the treatments did not differ significantly (P = .45). However, TTF, response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients (P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively) (Fig 7). There were three early deaths and one patient had treatment withheld after a hip fracture. Tamoxifen did not enhance the response rate, response duration or survival in ER + patients over CAF alone. Lippman et al retrospectively analyzed 70 patients with metastatic breast cancer treated with chemotherapy. A retrospective review of ER and response among patients on a prior CALGB study failed to show any impact of ER on response frequency." This study is the only prospectively randomized study analyzing the response of ER + v ER - patients to chemotherapy (Table 6). Our ER + and ER - cases had identical response rates (56%) to chemotherapy (CAF), but ER + patients had significantly longer response durations (P = .00015), TTF (P = .0061), and survival (P = .0058) than ER- patients (Fig 5). 


Clearly, the assumption that there is a differential response of ER + v ER- patients to chemotherapy is not correct. A lack of differential response of ER + cells to chemotherapy may explain the lack of additive effect in ER + patients when chemotherapy and hormonal therapy are used concurrently. However, to date, there have been no convincing data that the addition of hormonal therapy has enhanced the response rate, response duration, or survival over chemotherapy alone. The postoophorectomy studies of VanDyke and Falkson did show an enhanced response rate to combination treatment, but response rates were not greater than that reported for chemotherapy alone. Neither of these trials stratified patients by receptor status. The survival of 21 ER + patients treated with combined DES + CF was significantly longer than 19 ER + treated with DES followed by chemotherapy after relapse or treatment failure. Segaloff included sclerosis and eventual disappearance of pure osteolytic lesions as an objective response in the response criteria for the Cooperative Breast Group. 


As confirmed in this study, patients with only bone metastases frequently have a prolonged chronic course, and have a significantly longer survival than patients with visceral metastases. Although the criteria for objective response in patients with bone only metastases are frequently lacking, the criteria for treatment failure are quite good. 
