Nencialso found that positivity of 20% of the cells was sufficient to give a positive ER by cytosolic assay. The rationale for combining hormonal therapywith cytotoxic chemotherapy is based on the assumptionthat breast cancers are heterogeneousin terms of ER content, and that there is a differential responsiveness of ER + and ER - cellsto hormonal and chemotherapy. Tamoxifenwas chosen as the hormonal agent because of itsdemonstrated efficacy in postmenopausal womenwith breast cancer and its relative lack of toxicity. 14,15 Patients were prospectively randomized after stratification by ER content, menopausal status,dominant site of metastatic disease, and prior adjuvant chemotherapy. Preliminary data have been previously reported. 16 This constitutes the final report.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patient Eligibility
Eligibility requirements for this study included histologically documented carcinoma of the breast that was locally recurrent,metastatic or surgically incurable (stage III or IV), measurable disease, a CALGB performance score of 3 or less, and age < 75years. Any radiation therapy must have been completed at least 3 weeks earlier. Radiation therapy to 50% or more of the bony pelvis and lumbarspine or palliative radiotherapy to more than two sites of metastatic disease also rendered a patient ineligible. Patients who relapsed while receiving adjuvant therapy or who had been previously treated with chemotherapy or tamoxifen for metastatic disease were ineligible. If this were not possible, patients were stratified according to the ER determination made on the primary tumor. 

Patients were classified as having either visceral or other(osseous or soft tissue) dominant sites of disease on study entry. Osseous disease indicated metastases in bone. Soft tissue disease was defined as local recurrence in the skin or lymph nodes or inoperable (stageIV) breast cancer. After a total cumulative dose of450 mg/m 2 of doxorubicin had been reached, methotrexate wassubstituted at a dose of 40 mg/m 2 (30 mg/m 2 for patients older than 60 years). Reductions were also made for elevationsof serum bilirubin and SGOT and for the occurrence of stomatitis,diarrhea, or cystitis.

Ancillary Therapy
Palliative radiation was not permitted for patients on protocol,with the exception of cranial irradiation for documented intracranial metastases. Chemotherapy was not withheld when patients required such irradiation.

Response Criteria
A complete response (CR) required disappearance of all signs and symptoms attributable to the tumor, including the disappearanceof all lesions for at least 1 month. No new lesions could appear. 
For bony disease, CR meant recalcification of all osteolyticlesions. A partial response (PR) indicated a > 50% reduction in thesum of the products of the two largest perpendicular diameters of all measured lesions without deterioration in performance. Stable disease (stable) was a reduction in tumor size of < 50%or an increase < 25% over the original measurements. Progressive disease (PD) indicated the appearance of new lesions subsequently proven to be metastases. Patients were evaluated after two courses (8 weeks) of therapy. Responding patients and those with stable disease continued on therapy until there was evidence of tumor progression or prohibitive drug toxicity. Of the 451 evaluable cases, 46 had prior adjuvantchemotherapy (completed >6 months before protocol entry), and 26 had evaluable but nonmeasurable bone disease. The adjuvant group will be analyzed separately.


Comparability of Groups (Patient Characteristics), Measurable Disease
The treatment groups were comparable on allbaseline characteristics (Table 3). Approximately three quarters of the patients on this study were postmenopausal, with a median age of 56 years. Seventy seven percent of the patients on the CAF regimenand 75% of those on the TCAF regimen had a performance score of 0 or 1. Among 375 patients,CRs were seen in 47 (25%) of patients treated with TCAF and 34 (18%) of patients treated withCAF (Table 4). PRs were seen in 71 (38%) TCAF patients and 71 (37%) patients onCAF. The median durations of response were 12.3 (TCAF)and 11.3 (CAF) months, respectively (P = .81). Median durations of response were 16.5, 15.8, and 8.5 months, respectively, with aP value of .004. There was no significant difference in duration of response by treatment (TCAF v CAF) inER + patients. However, TTF,response duration, and survival of ER + patients were significantly longer than those of ER - patients(P = .017, .0074, and .0057, respectively)(Fig 7).

Toxicity
Toxicity data were available on 375 of 379 cases (98.9% of cases entered) and are displayed in Table 8. The other lethal toxicity was congestive heart failure. The secondary question asked by this study was whether there is a differential response ofER + v ER- tumors to chemotherapy. Hug et al have confirmed that tamoxifen attenuates the cytotoxicpotential of 5-FU and doxorubicin in human breast cancer cell lines. The postoophorectomy studies of VanDyke and Falkson did show an enhanced response rate to combination treatment,but response rates were not greater thanthat reported for chemotherapy alone.  Neitherof these trials stratified patients by receptor status. However,each of these trials was designed to evaluate hormonal therapy with or without chemotherapy,rather than chemotherapy with or without hormonaltherapy. 

In the first of these trials, Glick et al randomized 89 ER + or ER? postmenopausal women to tamoxifen with CMF or to tamoxifen(with CMF on progression), and were unable to document benefit of the combined therapy over tamoxifen alone. They also randomized 31 ER - patients toCF - DES, but were unable to demonstrate any advantage to combined treatment. Segaloff4 included sclerosis and eventual disappearance of pure osteolyticlesions as an objective response in the response criteria for the Cooperative Breast Group. Serial bone scans may be helpful,but bone scans improve slowly, thus rendering this technique of greater value in documenting treatment failure rather than response. Scans also may appear "worse" as healing occurs. As documented in this study, TTF is an excellent and probably the only means of evaluating response in bone only patients. TTF is not dependenton objective response criteria such as the healing of a lytic lesion. 