

Dosing regimens varied from intermittent doses (0.15 mg/kg q 2 h´3 daily doses) to continuous
infusions (1–3 mg/h) preceded by loading doses of 8–12 mg. Several  European studies evaluated
ondansetron administered as an i.v. loading dose (8–12 mg i.v.) followed by continuous infusion of 
1–4 mg/h (daily ondansetron dose ranged from 32 to 108 mg) in non-BMT patients receiving
cisplatin-based chemotherapy.  Marty et al.  observed similar response rates between a single 32-mg
i.v. dose and an 8-mg i.v. loading dose followed by a 1 mg/h continuous infusion of ondansetron in
acute cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting (76% vs 72% complete or major response in  the single
dose arm vs the continuous infusion arm).


Despite the similar results observed regarding both the method of ondansetron administration (bolus
vs continuous infusion)  and the actual dosage administered (1 vs up to 4 mg/h), it was believed
that higher than conventional ondansetron dosage  regimens and, perhaps, continuous administration
might be needed in the BMT setting. 


Patients were eligible for participation in this IRB-approved study if they met the following
criteria, more than 18 but less  than 65 years of age, non-pregnant female, with a histologically
confirmed diagnosis of breast cancer, undergoing high-dose  chemotherapy in preparation for
autologous bone marrow transplantation, and provision of written informed consent. Patients  were
excluded for the following reasons, a Karnofsky performance status of <60%, chronic nausea and/or
vomiting or nausea and/or vomiting of other etiologies, including, but not limited to, gastric
outlet obstruction, increased intracranial  pressure or brain metastases, documented vomiting or
retching episodes or uncontrolled nausea in the 12 h prior to the first  dose of i.v. ondansetron,
radiation therapy administered as part of the preparative regimen, or medications with known or 
potential antiemetic activity administered in the 12 h prior to the initiation of i.v. ondansetron. 
The restricted  medications included benzodiazepines, butyrophenones, corticosteroids, cannabinoids,
phenothiazines, antihistamines,  tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors,
metoclopramide, trimethobenzamide, scopolamine, fluoxetine,  dipravan, paroxetine and sertraline. 
According their guidelines, the emetogenic potential of  cyclophosphamide or carboplatin as a single
agent was graded as a level 4 (60–90% emesis frequency without effective  antiemetic prophylaxis,
Fig. 1). 


Upon enrollment, patients were randomized to either an intermittent (INT) or a continuous
intravenous infusion (CIV)  ondansetron regimen using a 1,1 block randomization scheme. 


The history included a review of demographic information and historical status of cancer. 


Nausea was assessed by a numerical visual analogue scale ranging from 0 to 100 mm, with 0  mm
representing no nausea and 100 mm representing the worst nausea ever experienced. Control of emesis
was graded daily for each 24-h period as complete (zero emetic episodes), major (one to two emetic
episodes), minor (three to four emetic episodes) and failure (five or more emetic episodes or the 
requirement of rescue therapy). If the patient required rescue therapy on 1 day, the day  was graded
as a failure, however, she was eligible for the next day of therapy. 


A Fisher’s exact  test was used if half of the cells had expected counts less than 5, which makes
the Chi-square test invalid. 


The only significant difference (P=0.05) detected between treatment arms in Table 1 was the mean
age. 


Table 2 illustrates the median numbers of vomits and retches and the  nausea score per day. 


The third most  common antiemetic combination utilized was lorazepam, diphenhydramine, and
haloperidol. Other adverse effects occurring in less than 5% of patients included, chest pain,
shortness of breath, tachycardia, cough, hiccups and syncope. For example, BMT preparative regimens
can also be associated with  diarrhea, elevated transaminases and congestion.


Overall,  ondansetron and granisetron were more effective than tropisetron for controlling emesis,
but the best control occurred when  these agents were used in combination with dexamethasone. When
interpreting the success rates in our study, it is important to consider the  actual number of
vomits and retches that occurred per day. The addition of dexamethasone and/or metoclopramide may
help control the delayed phase of nausea and vomiting. 


Agura et al. found similar  results when he compared two dose levels of ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg LD
followed by 0.035 mg/kg per h vs 0.2 mg/kg LD followed by 0.07 mg/kg per h) with metoclopramide plus
droperidol in 60 BMT patients. 


Although several other antiemetic studies in BMT patients have been reported since the initiation of
this trial, it is  difficult to compare them because, (1) patient populations vary with respect to
history of prior chemotherapy exposure, (2)  preparative regimens differ in combinations of drugs
used, inclusion or exclusion of radiation therapy, and in the schedule  of drug administration, (3)
antiemetic combinations, dosages and duration of administration are not consistent, and (4) 
definitions of outcomes are not standardized. The incidence and severity of nausea and vomiting is
higher in women, so that the  results of this study performed in breast cancer patients should be
evaluated with caution when they are compared with those  of studies in other BMT populations.


There were no differences between ondansetron given as a continuous infusion (8 mg LD i.v., then 2
mg/h i.v.) or intermittent bolus dosing (24 mg i.v. b.i.d.) for the control of nausea and vomiting
in breast cancer patients undergoing autologous BMT.  
