

Most studies evaluating ondansetron for BMT preparative regimens prior to the initiation  of this
study were small and nonrandomized [6, 8, 19, 25]. Dosing regimens varied from intermittent doses
(0.15 mg/kg q 2 h´3 daily doses) to continuous infusions (1–3 mg/h) preceded by loading doses of
8–12 mg. Several  European studies evaluated ondansetron administered as an i.v. loading dose (8–12
mg i.v.) followed by continuous infusion of  1–4 mg/h (daily ondansetron dose ranged from 32 to 108
mg) in non-BMT patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.  Marty et al.  observed similar
response rates between a single 32-mg i.v. dose and an 8-mg i.v. loading dose followed by a 1 mg/h
continuous infusion of ondansetron in acute cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting (76% vs 72%
complete or major response in  the single dose arm vs the continuous infusion arm).


Despite the similar results observed regarding both the method of ondansetron administration (bolus
vs continuous infusion)  and the actual dosage administered (1 vs up to 4 mg/h), it was believed
that higher than conventional ondansetron dosage  regimens and, perhaps, continuous administration
might be needed in the BMT setting. Therefore, our objective was to conduct a prospective, 
randomized, non-blinded, controlled study comparing two different administration methods for
high-dose ondansetron during a  BMT preparative regimen in breast cancer patients.


Patients were eligible for participation in this IRB-approved study if they met the following
criteria, more than 18 but less  than 65 years of age, non-pregnant female, with a histologically
confirmed diagnosis of breast cancer, undergoing high-dose  chemotherapy in preparation for
autologous bone marrow transplantation, and provision of written informed consent. Patients  were
excluded for the following reasons, a Karnofsky performance status of <60%, chronic nausea and/or
vomiting or nausea and/or vomiting of other etiologies, including, but not limited to, gastric
outlet obstruction, increased intracranial  pressure or brain metastases, documented vomiting or
retching episodes or uncontrolled nausea in the 12 h prior to the first  dose of i.v. ondansetron,
radiation therapy administered as part of the preparative regimen, or medications with known or 
potential antiemetic activity administered in the 12 h prior to the initiation of i.v. ondansetron. 
According their guidelines, the emetogenic potential of  cyclophosphamide or carboplatin as a single
agent was graded as a level 4 (60–90% emesis frequency without effective  antiemetic prophylaxis,
Fig. 1). 


Antiemetic therapy.Upon enrollment, patients were randomized to either an intermittent (INT) or a
continuous intravenous infusion (CIV)  ondansetron regimen using a 1,1 block randomization scheme. 


The history included a review of demographic information and historical status of cancer. Laboratory
analysis,  including blood chemistries, was conducted within 24 h before and after the study.


Control of emesis was graded daily for each 24-h period as complete (zero emetic episodes), major
(one to two emetic episodes), minor (three to four emetic episodes) and failure (five or more emetic
episodes or the  requirement of rescue therapy). 


Statistical analysis was performed using a Chi-square test or a Fisher’s exact test when comparing
means. The t-test was used to compare means for demographic data and number  of rescue medications. 


There was no statistical difference  between treatment groups in the worst grade of emesis (P=0.49,
2-tail Fisher’s exact test). Table 2 illustrates the median numbers of vomits and retches and the 
nausea score per day. 


Of the 2 patients who had an overall CR rate, 1 had received diphenhydramine and 1 had not. The most
 common adverse effects occurring during the study period are outlined in order of decreasing
frequency in Table 3. 


No  significant differences in efficacy or toxicity were detected between the CIV and INT
ondansetron groups. 


Other potential mechanisms to target may include the effect of chemotherapy  metabolites on the
central and enteric nervous systems as well as disruption of gut motility.


Agura et al. found similar  results when he compared two dose levels of ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg LD
followed by 0.035 mg/kg per h vs 0.2 mg/kg LD followed by 0.07 mg/kg per h) with metoclopramide plus
droperidol in 60 BMT patients. 


Although several other antiemetic studies in BMT patients have been reported since the initiation of
this trial, it is  difficult to compare them because, (1) patient populations vary with respect to
history of prior chemotherapy exposure, (2)  preparative regimens differ in combinations of drugs
used, inclusion or exclusion of radiation therapy, and in the schedule  of drug administration, (3)
antiemetic combinations, dosages and duration of administration are not consistent, and (4) 
definitions of outcomes are not standardized. The incidence and severity of nausea and vomiting is
higher in women, so that the  results of this study performed in breast cancer patients should be
evaluated with caution when they are compared with those  of studies in other BMT populations.


There were no differences between ondansetron given as a continuous infusion (8 mg LD i.v., then 2
mg/h i.v.) or intermittent bolus dosing (24 mg i.v. b.i.d.) for the control of nausea and vomiting
in breast cancer patients undergoing autologous BMT.  
