This is due to the higher than standard doses and the combinations of chemotherapy utilized, and also to the known variances in emetogenicity patterns. To date, no dose-limiting adverse events have been reported with ondansetron. We wanted to evaluate a patient population receiving the same chemotherapy drugs (and hence the same emetogenic potential) on the same schedule to avoid difficulty in interpretation of results. Patients were excluded for the following reasons, a Karnofsky performance status of <60%, chronic nausea and/or vomiting or nausea and/or vomiting of other etiologies, including, but not limited to, gastric outlet obstruction, increased intracranial pressure or brain metastases, documented vomiting or retching episodes or uncontrolled nausea in the 12 h prior to the first dose of i.v. ondansetron,radiation therapy administered as part of the preparative regimen, ormedications with known or potential antiemetic activity administered in the 12 h prior to the initiation of i.v. ondansetron. The restricted medications included benzodiazepines, butyrophenones, corticosteroids,cannabinoids, phenothiazines, antihistamines, tricyclicantidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, metoclopramide, trimethobenzamide,scopolamine, fluoxetine, dipravan, paroxetine andsertraline. Patients were also excluded if they required any of the restricted medications during the study period. Premedications for transfusions, such as diphenhydramine or hydrocortisone, were not excluded. All patients received a preparative regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide1500 mg/m2 i.v. q 24 h´4 doses, thio-TEPA 125 mg/m2i.v. q 24 h´4 doses and carboplatin 200 mg/m2 i.v. q 24 h´4 doses(Fig. 1).  Recently, Hesketh etal. classified the acute emetogenicity of antineoplastic agents. Although thio-TEPA’s emetogenicity is not ranked by Hesketh et al., the formula he proposed to rank the emetogenicity of combination chemotherapy indicates the maximum level 5(>90% emesis frequency without effective antiemetic prophylaxis) for this regimen. 

Antiemetic therapy
Upon enrollment, patients were randomized to either an intermittent(INT) or a continuous intravenous infusion (CIV) ondansetron regimen using a 1,1 block randomization scheme. Ondansetron therapy was initiated 30 min before the first dose of chemotherapy for both study arms. The history included a review of demographic information and historical status of cancer. An episode of vomiting was defined as expulsion of any stomach contents through the mouth. An episode of retching was defined as an attempt to vomit that was unproductive of stomach contents. Continuous vomiting and/or retching was defined as two or more vomits and/or retches within 1min of each other.  Nausea was assessed by a numerical visual analogue scale ranging from 0 to 100 mm, with 0 mm representing nonausea and 100 mm representing the worst nausea ever experienced. Patients,assisted by nurses when necessary, were responsible for recording the number of vomits and retches. The need for rescue therapy was left to the discretion of the patient and/or investigator. At the end of each 24-h period of therapy, emetic episodes were graded. 

Clinical analysis
Each patient was evaluated as having been a “success” or “failure.” A failure was defined as 5 or more emetic episodes or a requirement for rescue therapy. The proportion of successes and failures in each arm for each day of the study was compared. The percentage of patients requiring rescue antiemetics and the number of rescue antiemetic doses administered each day were evaluated. The Wilcoxon signed-rank testwas used for nonparametric variables. Data were analyzed for these two patientsup until the time they withdrew from the study (day –5and day –4). Thirty-four patients were randomized to INT ondansetron and 32 to CIV ondansetron. Mean age, age range, ethnicity and disease status were evenly distributed between treatment arms, as illustrated in Table 1. Means were compared with a t-test, and categorical variableswere compared with the Chi-square test. The only significant difference (P=0.05) detected between treatment arms in Table 1 was the mean age. This difference was not felt to be clinically significant. The worst grade of emesis was determined for each patient over the entire study period. There was no statistical difference between treatment groups in the worst grade ofemesis (P=0.49, 2-tail Fisher’s exact test). Figure 2 illustrates the percentage of patients experiencing success (complete, major, or minorcontrol) of emesis control per day. There was no significant difference between treatment arms in grade of emesis per day for the entire study period. No significant differences were detected between study arms for these three variables. Documentation of the number of retches was poor, with only 43% of 386 possible values recorded. Vomiting and nausea scores were missing in 5% and 24%,respectively.
From day –7 through day –2, the INT group received amean (±SEM) of 11.9 (±1.4) rescue medications and the CIV group received a mean (±SEM) of 14.4 (±1.9) rescuemedications (P=0.30). Additional study of various combinations of antiemetics in BMT recipients is needed to help determine the most efficacious regimen in these patients.
