Introduction 
Nausea and vomiting are significant side effects in bone marrow transplant (BMT) patients who receive high-dose preparative regimens. In one series, nausea and vomiting was reported in 100% of BMT patients. observed moderate to severe nausea and vomiting despite the administration of prophylactic antiemetics . Most studies evaluating ondansetron for BMT preparative regimens prior to the initiation of this study were small and nonrandomized [6, 8, 19, 25]. Several European studies evaluated ondansetron administered as an i.v. 


Despite the similar results observed regarding both the method of ondansetron administration (bolus vs continuous infusion) and the actual dosage administered (1 vs up to 4 mg/h), it was believed that higher than conventional ondansetron dosage regimens and, perhaps, continuous administration might be needed in the BMT setting. Patients were also excluded if they required any of the restricted medications during the study period. All patients received a preparative regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide 1500 mg/m2 i.v. Ondansetron therapy was initiated 30 min before the first dose of chemotherapy for both study arms. The number and frequency of rescue medications were documented. Patients were allowed to receive rescue medications for nausea and or vomiting if requested. Nausea scores, number of vomits, and number of retches were also compared between study groups. The percentage of patients requiring rescue antiemetics and the number of rescue antiemetic doses administered each day were evaluated. 


Results 

Sixty-six non-chemotherapy-naive patients were enrolled in the study from January 1994 through October 1995. Data were analyzed for these two patients up until the time they withdrew from the study (day –5 and day –4). Thirty-four patients were randomized to INT ondansetron and 32 to CIV ondansetron. 


The worst grade of emesis was determined for each patient over the entire study period. Table 2 illustrates the median numbers of vomits and retches and the nausea score per day. No significant differences were detected between study arms for these three variables. There was no statistical difference in the mean number of rescue medications administered between treatment groups (P=0.30). Figure 3 demonstrates the percentages of patients requiring rescue antiemetics each day. There were no significant differences noted between study arms. Additionally, no significant differences were detected in the median number of rescue antiemetic doses administered per day (range 0–4). The most common rescue antiemetics used as single agents were lorazepam and prochlorperazine. Although antihistamines were restricted during this study, several patients received one or more antihistamine doses during the study period (most often for itching or sleep). However, exclusion of these patients did not affect statistical analysis and study outcomes. Evaluation of these results by study day did not show significant differences between the two study arms. This study confirms our study results and suggests there are no advantages of continuous infusion 5HT3 antagonists over intermittent bolus doses. The 

inability to sustain high levels of emetic control beyond day 1 of chemotherapy suggests that nonserotonergic mechanisms associated with nausea and vomiting may contribute significantly from day 2 onward. The median number of vomits and retches per day was below five throughout the entire study period (Table 2). Although the percentage of patients receiving rescue antiemetics was less than 10% on the initial day of chemotherapy, this number increased over the next 2 days of chemotherapy and plateaued such that approximately 80% of patients required rescue antiemetics during the last 3 days of the study period (Fig. Of those patients requiring rescue antiemetics, the median number of doses administered per day ranged from zero to 4 over the study period. Therefore, the majority of failures occurring in our study were due to the requirement for rescue antiemetics and not because patients experienced five or more emetic episodes. For example, on day 3 (day –5) of the preparative regimen utilized for this study, patients probably experienced both “acute” nausea and vomiting from the chemotherapy agents administered on day 3 (day –5), and “delayed” nausea and vomiting from cyclophosphamide administered on days 1 and 2 (days –7 and –6). Anticipatory nausea and vomiting, a conditioned response resulting from poor control of emesis with previous chemotherapy, may also contribute. Beginning with the 2nd day of chemotherapy, at least 1 patient reported a daily nausea score of 98 or higher. Dexamethaone has demonstrated some efficacy for control of delayed nausea and its addition to this antiemetic regimen might have improved outcomes. The missing values for number of vomits, number of retches, and nausea score emphasize the difficulty of conducting an antiemetic clinical trial. As the study progressed and patients became sicker, the compliance rate for completing study forms declined. However, overall control of emesis had a wider range in our study than seen in other studies. The incidence and severity of nausea and vomiting is higher in women, so that the results of this study performed in breast cancer patients should be evaluated with caution when they are compared with those of studies in other BMT populations. b.i.d.) for the control of nausea and vomiting in breast cancer patients undergoing autologous BMT. A combination of antiemetics targeting various mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting may be necessary to improve response rates. Additional study of various combinations of antiemetics in BMT recipients is needed to help determine the most efficacious regimen in these patients.

