Nausea and vomiting are significant side effects in bone marrow transplant (BMT) patients who receive high-dose preparative  regimens. Owing to the higher doses of chemotherapy given in preparation for BMT and to the combinations of agents  administered, chemotherapy-based preparative regimens have the potential to produce more nausea and vomiting than high-dose  cisplatin. In one series, nausea and vomiting was reported in 100% of BMT patients. In another series of autologous BMT  patients, Antman et al. observed moderate to severe nausea and vomiting despite the administration of prophylactic  antiemetics . Most studies evaluating ondansetron for BMT preparative regimens prior to the initiation  of this study were small and nonrandomized [6, 8, 19, 25]. Dosing regimens varied from intermittent doses (0.15 mg/kg q 2 h´3 daily doses) to continuous infusions (1–3 mg/h) preceded by loading doses of 8–12 mg. Several  European studies evaluated ondansetron administered as an i.v. loading dose (8–12 mg i.v.) followed by continuous infusion of  1–4 mg/h (daily ondansetron dose ranged from 32 to 108 mg) in non-BMT patients receiving cisplatin-based chemotherapy.  Patients and methods
Patients were also excluded if they required any of the restricted medications during  the study period. Antiemetic therapy
Ondansetron therapy was initiated 30 min before the first dose of  chemotherapy for both study arms. An emetic episode was defined as a single vomit or retch or  any number of continuous vomits and/or retches. Patients were allowed to receive rescue medications for nausea and or vomiting if requested.

Success was defined as complete control, major control  (1–2 emetic episodes), or minor control (3–4 emetic episodes). Nausea scores, number of vomits, and number of retches were also compared between study groups. The percentage of patients  requiring rescue antiemetics and the number of rescue antiemetic doses administered each day were evaluated. Results
Sixty-six non-chemotherapy-naive patients were enrolled in the study from January 1994 through October 1995. Thirty-four patients were randomized to INT ondansetron and 32 to CIV  ondansetron. The worst grade of emesis was determined for each patient over the entire study period. All 32 (100%) patients in the CIV  arm and 32 (94%) patients in the INT arm had failure as their worst grade of emesis. Two (6%) patients in the INT arm had  complete control of emesis throughout the study. Figure 2 illustrates the percentage of patients experiencing success  (complete, major, or minor control) of emesis control per day. No significant differences were detected between study arms for these three variables. Vomiting and nausea scores were missing in 5%  and 24%, respectively.

There were no significant differences noted between study arms. Additionally, no significant  differences were detected in the median number of rescue antiemetic doses administered per day (range 0–4). During the entire study period, almost all patients (62/64) had 1 or more days rated as a failure for grade of emesis. This study confirms our study results and suggests there are no  advantages of continuous infusion 5HT3 antagonists over intermittent bolus doses.

Of  those patients requiring rescue antiemetics, the median number of doses administered per day ranged from zero to 4 over the  study period. For example, on day 3 (day –5) of the preparative regimen utilized for this study, patients probably  experienced both “acute” nausea and vomiting from the chemotherapy agents administered on day 3 (day –5), and “delayed”  nausea and vomiting from cyclophosphamide administered on days 1 and 2 (days –7 and –6). Anticipatory nausea and vomiting, a conditioned  response resulting from poor control of emesis with previous chemotherapy, may also contribute. As the study  progressed and patients became sicker, the compliance rate for completing study forms declined. Overall, response rates in  our study did not differ significantly from trials using more standard doses of ondansetron. Agura et al. found similar  results when he compared two dose levels of ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg LD followed by 0.035 mg/kg per h vs 0.2 mg/kg LD followed by 0.07 mg/kg per h) with metoclopramide plus droperidol in 60 BMT patients. Ondansetron provided better emesis control than  metoclopramide plus droperidol; however, on the day of worst emesis control, the low-dose ondansetron provided significantly  better control than the high-dose ondansetron. A combination of antiemetics targeting various mechanisms of chemotherapy-induced nausea and  vomiting may be necessary to improve response rates. 

