Purpose, Adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma is controversial because previous trials reported conflicting results.

The present study was designed with restricted selection criteria and high dose-intensities of the two most active chemotherapeutic agents.

Stratification was by primary versus recurrent tumors and by tumor diameter greater than or equal to 10 cm versus less than 10 cm.

Results,After a median follow-up of 59 months, 60 patients had relapsed and 48 died (28 and 20 in the treatment arm and 32 and 28 in the control arm, respectively).

The median disease-free survival (DFS) was 48 months in the treatment group and 16 months in the control group (P = .04), and the median overall survival (OS) was 75 months for treated and 46 months for untreated patients (P = .03).

Conclusion,Intensified adjuvant chemotherapy had a positive impact on the DFS and OS of patients with high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas at a median follow-up of 59 months.

Therefore, our data favor an intensified treatment in similar cases.

Although cure is still difficult to achieve, a significant delay in death is worthwhile, also considering the short duration of treatment and the absence of toxic deaths.

SOFT TISSUE sarcomas represent less than 1% of all malignant tumors and derive from the mesenchymal tissues present in the whole human body.

However, the vast majorities arise from the extra-osseous and subcutaneous soft tissue of the limbs.

Their natural history is partially known and clinical decisions rely on a few simple and well-recognized prognostic factors such as size, grading, and location.

The treatment of limb sarcomas mainly relies on a combined-modality approach, after the demonstration that pre-or postoperative radiation and conservative surgery led to local control in a high proportion of patients.4 In fact, limb-sparing procedures allow an 85% to 90% local dis-ease-free survival (DFS) rate and demolitive surgery now represents only 5% to 10% of the operations in comparison with the 50% survival rate of the 1960s to 1970s.

Nevertheless, a great proportion of high-risk soft tissue sarcoma patients develop distant metastases during their lives.

In the early 1960s, this clinical behaviour prompted the introduction of adjuvant chemotherapy trials with the aim of increasing DFS and possibly overall survival (OS).

The first generation of randomized adjuvant trials have recently been reviewed and a meta-analysis performed on the basis of updated patient records.

Their main differences, compared with the previous studies, are the introduction of ifosfamide (IFO) and the intensification of doses in combination with hematopoietic growth factors, and more restricted selection criteria.

Here we report the results of the Italian co-operative study after a median follow-up of 59 months and a minimum time between randomization and date last seen of 28 months among patients who did not die.

Patients were treated with radical surgery, wide resection followed by postoperative radiation therapy, or pre-operative radiation therapy.

Chemotherapy, repeated every 3 weeks, consisted of five cycles of 4'-epidoxorubicin (EPI) 60 mg/m2/die, in a short intravenous (IV) infusion on days 1 and 2 (total dose per cycle, 120 mg/m2), IFO 1.8 g/m2/die diluted in 500 mL of normal saline and administered over 1 hour on days 1 through 5 (total dose per cycle, 9 g/m2), and 6-mercapto-ethansulfonate in a bolus IV injection at 20% of the IFO dose, given before and 4 and 8 hours after the IFO infusions.

A dose reduction scheme was defined to avoid excessive toxicity.

All centers faxed protocol-specific eligibility checklists to the statistics office in Aviano, patients were stratified using a four-block stratification by primary tumor (diameter < 10 cm v>= 10 cm) and recurrent tumor (diameter < 10 cm v>= 10 cm) and randomized to treatment or control groups.

The study period was calculated from randomization to the first occurrence of the considered events (local recurrence alone, metastasis with or without local recurrence, death due to disease, toxic death).

Overall DFS was defined as the time between randomization and the first recurrence, and OS was defined as the time between randomization and death as a result of disease (patients dying in complete remission were considered as censored on the date of death for OS).

The nonhematologic toxicities were reversible alopecia (100% of cases), grade 3 mucositis (10% of cases), and grade 3 nausea and vomiting (3% of cases).

No other grade 3 toxicities were encountered and, in particular, no cardiac impairment was observed as evaluated by a decrease in the left ventricular ejection fraction.

At the time of statistical analysis (November 1999), the median follow-up for the 104 patients included in the study was 59 months, 61 months in the treatment arm and 55 months in the control arm.

The ranges for the observation time (ie, the time between randomization and date of last visit) among censored patients who did not die were 28 to 84 months, 39 to 84 months, and 28 to 81 months, respectively.

During the follow-up period, disease recurrences were recorded in 28 of the 53 treated patients and in 32 of the 51 patients who did not undergo adjuvant therapy, 20 treated patients and 28 untreated patients died.

All deaths except one (in the control arm) were disease related.

Univariate analyses did not reveal any statistically significant difference in overall DFS and OS for any of the characteristics considered (age, sex, center of surgery, histology, grading, site of primary tumor, presentation, diameter, local treatment, and stratification) with the exception of adjuvant treatment (data not shown).

Because none of the patient characteristics was associated with the end point at the time of univariate analysis, unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were computed by means of the Cox proportional hazards model.

Sixty first events (local, distant only, and synchronous distant and local) were observed overall (32 in the control arm and 28 in the treatment arm).

In four patients, the first event was a synchronous local relapse with metastases (one patient in the control arm and three patients in the treatment arm).

Furthermore, nine patients developed metachronous relapse at a different site (three were local relapse after a metastasis and six were distant relapses after a previous local relapse).

Additional relapses at the same site after an adequate treatment are not reported.

The median overall DFS was 48 months among treated patients and 16 months in the control group.

Overall, 13 patients had a local recurrence of disease as the first relapse without simultaneous distant metastases (four patients in the treatment arm and nine patients in the control arm, Table 4).

Overall, patients in the treatment arm had an indication of reduction in the risk of local recurrence (P = .07).

was respectively, two of 16 patients, seven of 20, and two of 15 for the control group and three of 20 patients, six of 24, and zero of nine for the treatment group.

As the first event, a total of 47 distant relapses were observed (22 single distant events in the control group and 21 in the treatment group, one synchronous distant and local event in the control group and three in the treatment group Table 4).

There were a total of 48 deaths, 20 in the treated group and 28 in the control group, forty-seven deaths were disease related.

DISCUSSION Adjuvant treatment of localized soft tissue sarcomas is controversial because no sufficient and convincing data are available.

Third, six studies used doxorubicin as a single agent at doses ranging from 60 to 90 mg/m2 per cycle (total doses of 420 to 540 mg/m2), whereas the per cycle and total doxorubicin doses in the polychemotherapy studies were 50 to 90 mg/m2 and 200 to 550 mg/m2, respectively, indicating possible underdosing of the principal active agent.

The early 1990s saw the activation of a number of second-generation protocols throughout the world, which, although they were planned independently, were extraordinarily similar in terms of their selection criteria, chemotherapeutic regimens, and use of growth factors.

These unfavorable aspects of our study are probably related to the selection of high-risk patients only.

We think that these data are mature enough to be reported on, and we look forward to being able to describe definitive results in a future report based on 10 years of median follow-up.

