27|I|The optimal treatment of large stage IB cervical cancer has been a source of controversy since the late 1960s .
3|I|Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy results in faster and more complete responses and better survival than expected with radiotherapy alone .
2|I |We elected to test this combination in a phase 3 trial to determine whether concurrent weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy would improve progression-free survival and survival in women with large "bulky" or barrel-shaped , stage IB cervical cancers .
17|M|Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell carcinoma , adenocarcinoma , or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix of stage IB (exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors with a minimal diameter of 4 cm) were eligible for the study .
18|M|Patients with histologic evidence of lymph-node involvementwere not eligible, nor were those who had previously received radiotherapy or chemotherapy or those with a history of cancer other than nonmelanoma skin cancer .
9|M|All patients were scheduled to undergo external irradiation , intracavitary brachytherapy , and extrafascial hysterectomy , with half the patients randomly assigned to receive weekly intravenous infusions of cisplatin during the period of radiotherapy . 
10|M|Cisplatin was given intravenously once a week at a dose of 40 mg per square meter of body-surface area , with the total dose not to exceed 70 mg per week . A maximum of six doses of cisplatin was given .
11|M|Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed three to six weeks after the completion of radiotherapy .
19|M|Patients were evaluated every three months for the first two years and then semiannually for three additional years .
12|M|The primary end points were progression-free survival and survival .
13|M|Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement , the treatment assignments were stratified according to center and to whether para-aortic lymph nodes were evaluated surgically , with approximately equal numbers of patients assigned to each group .
20|M|Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent) in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin .
21|D|More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine , vs. five in the combined-therapy group) , and more patients in this group also had an early recurrence (eight vs. two) .
22|R|The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table 4) .
23|R|Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent) , as compared with 27 of the patients in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table 4) .
14|R|Cox multiple regression analysis showed that the size of the tumor as assessed by physical examination and the histologic grade of the tumor were both significant prognostic factors .
24|D|The treatment of women with bulky stage IB cervical cancers has historically been only partially satisfactory , with survival rates of 70 to 75 percent , substantially below the rates of 88 to 92 percent expected with smaller stage IB cancers .
15|D|The recognition , in some centers , that patients with bulky stage  IB cancers had higher rates of recurrent disease within the cervical area led to the inclusion of adjuvant extrafascial hysterectomy in the treatment regimen for these women .
16|D|This approach was , however , associated with considerable morbidity .
8|I|The use of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy has gradually been abandoned , but there has continued to be disagreement about the value of the operation .
7|M|Therefore , we chose to test the value of concurrent treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followed by hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy alone followed by hysterectomy .
26|I|Cisplatin potentiates the sublethal damage induced by radiation and inhibits the repair of potentially lethal radiation-induced damage .
5|R|The risk of recurrence and death was significantly reduced by concurrent treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy .
25|D|In the earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group study that assessed the value of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy , surgery was associated with a significant reduction in the rate of relapses in the pelvic region , but the overall risk of recurrence was not significantly reduced (relative risk , 0.76 , 95 percent confidence interval , 0.52 to 1.12) and there was no significant difference in survival (relative risk of death , 0.91) .
6|D|It is reasonable to conclude on the basis of these results and our results that the elimination of hysterectomy from both regimens would not have affected the increase in survival associated with the use of cisplatin .
1|D|The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that we have discussed involve different stages of cervical cancer and combinations of treatment , but they share a common result , all five studies found that concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy led to better outcomes than radiotherapy alone or in combination with treatments that did not include cisplatin .
4|D|This remarkable consistency offers a compelling reason to consider cisplatin therapy in combination with radiotherapy as a new standard of care for patients with bulky stage IB , stage IIB through IVA , and high-risk cervical cancers .
