THE American Joint Committee on Cancer
1
and the International Federation of
Gynecology and Obstetrics define stage IB
cervical cancer as invasive cancer that is
confined to the cervix, with a depth of more than
5 mm and a width of more than 7 mm. In patients
with large stage IB cervical cancers, local control
and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller
stage I cancers, whether treated by surgery or irradiation.
2-4
The optimal treatment of large stage IB cervical
cancer has been a source of controversy since
the late 1960s.
5-9
In a previous randomized trial of combined external
and intracavitary irradiation alone or followed
by extrafascial hysterectomy, the Gynecologic Oncology
Group found that hysterectomy did not improve
survival, but it did significantly reduce the
rate of relapse in the pelvic region (unpublished data).
Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant
treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy
results in faster and more complete responses
and better survival than expected with radiotherapy
alone.
10-17
We elected to test this combination in a
phase 3 trial to determine whether concurrent weekly
treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy would
improve progression-free survival and survival in women
with large “bulky,” or barrel-shaped, stage IB cervical
cancers.
METHODS
Patients
Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell
carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma of the
cervix of stage IB (exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors
with a minimal diameter of 4 cm) were eligible for the study. In
addition, patients could have no radiographic evidence of lymphadenopathy
on computed tomographic scanning or lymphangiography,
and in those with enlarged or suspicious-appearing
lymph nodes, no evidence of cancer on fine-needle aspiration or
histologic evaluation.
Extraperitoneal surgical staging of lymph nodes was optional.
Patients with histologic evidence of lymph-node involvement
were not eligible, nor were those who had previously received radiotherapy
or chemotherapy or those with a history of cancer
other than nonmelanoma skin cancer.
All patients were required to have a Gynecologic Oncology
Group performance status of 0, 1, 2, or 3 (equivalent to Karnofsky
performance scores of 90 or 100, 70 or 80, 50 or 60, and 30
or 40, respectively) and adequate bone marrow, renal function,
and hepatic function. Patients were excluded from the study if
they were thought to be unable to complete the planned course
of therapy or the follow-up evaluations. In addition, patients had
to be medically suitable for hysterectomy.
The institutions that participated in the study are listed in the
Appendix. Written informed consent was obtained before entry
into the study, fulfilling all institutional, state, and federal regulations.
Radiotherapy
All patients were scheduled to undergo external irradiation, intracavitary
brachytherapy, and extrafascial hysterectomy, with half
the patients randomly assigned to receive weekly intravenous infusions
of cisplatin during the period of radiotherapy.
The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both
groups. Pelvic radiation was delivered with the four-field technique
with x-ray accelerators of at least 4-MV photons at a distance
of at least 100 cm. The treatment field was set to extend
3 cm beyond the known extent of disease and to encompass iliac
and lower common iliac lymph nodes. Fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy
were delivered 5 days a week over a period of 4
1/2 to 5 weeks, for
a total dose of 45 Gy. External irradiation was withheld if the
white-cell count fell below 1000 per cubic millimeter and was resumed
once the count rose above that level.
Low-dose brachytherapy was performed in one or two intracavitary
applications after the completion of pelvic radiotherapy.
Standard Fletcher–Suit or Henschke applicators were used. The
dose to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cm superior
to the cervical os) was 30 Gy, for a cumulative dose of 75
Gy, and the cumulative dose to point B (the pelvic wall) was 55 Gy.
Chemotherapy
Cisplatin was given intravenously once a week at a dose of 40
mg per square meter of body-surface area, with the total dose not
to exceed 70 mg per week. A maximum of six doses of cisplatin
was given. The final dose could be given during a patient’s hospitalization
for intracavitary brachytherapy.
Treatment with cisplatin was withheld if the total white-cell
count fell below 3000 per cubic millimeter or if creatinine clearance
fell below 50 ml per minute.
Hysterectomy
Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed three to six weeks after
the completion of radiotherapy. The corpus and cervix were
removed but not contiguous parametrial tissue. The uterine vessels
were transected at the uterine wall medial to the ureters,
which were not unroofed. No vaginal cuff was removed.
Quality Control and Follow-up
Patients’ medical records, films, and pathology slides were reviewed
by the appropriate Gynecologic Oncology Group committees.
The Radiological Physics Center in Houston coordinated
the reviews of radiotherapy.
Patients were evaluated every three months for the first two
years and then semiannually for three additional years. Adverse effects
were reported in accordance with the Gynecologic Oncology
Group criteria.

Outcome
The primary end points were progression-free survival and survival.
Progression-free survival was calculated from the date of entry
into the study to the date of disease recurrence, death, or the
last follow-up visit. Survival was calculated from the date of entry
into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit. Recurrences
were classified as local if they were detected in the pelvis,
cervix, or vagina and as distant if they were detected in extrapelvic
locations. The hysterectomy specimens were evaluated
for evidence of cancer.
Statistical Analysis
We estimated that 173 patients were needed in each treatment
group in order to be able to detect a 40 percent decrease in the
recurrence rate in the group given radiotherapy and chemotherapy.
The design called for a final analysis when 56 events (recurrences
or deaths) had occurred in patients receiving the control
regimen (radiotherapy alone) and provided the study with a statistical
power of 80 percent with use of the log-rank test and a
one-sided significance level of 0.05.
19
At the time of this analysis,
69 patients in the group receiving the control regimen had had a
recurrence of disease and 49 had died — 88 percent of the number
of deaths needed for a final analysis of survival. Therefore,
because of the large difference in outcome between the two
groups and the similarity in the rates of progression-free survival
and survival within each group, this analysis is the final analysis
of survival.
Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement; the
treatment assignments were stratified according to center and to
whether para-aortic lymph nodes were evaluated surgically, with
approximately equal numbers of patients assigned to each group.
Life-table estimates were calculated according to the method of
Kaplan and Meier.

The difference between groups in survival
and progression-free survival was evaluated with use of the logrank
test

according to the intention-to-treat principle. The Cox
model was used to evaluate the difference between treatment regimens,
adjust for prognostic factors,

and estimate the relative
likelihood (and 95 percent confidence intervals) of survival and
progression-free survival. Differences between groups in the severity
of adverse effects and the frequency of hysterectomy specimens
that were negative for cancer were evaluated with use of
Pearson’s chi-square test.

All reported P values are two-tailed.
Two scheduled interim analyses were conducted during the enrollment
phase of the trial: the first was conducted after 29 recurrences
had been reported, and the second after 47 recurrences
had been reported. The first stopping rule was chosen to reject
the null hypothesis at the 1 percent level, whereas the second was
chosen so that the level of rejection for both interim tests was
2 percent. This interim testing increased the value of the type I
error from the conventional 5 percent to 6 percent. To simplify
presentation, the P values were not adjusted for the results of the
two interim analyses.
RESULTS
Characteristics of the Patients
From February 1992 to April 1997, a total of 374
women were enrolled in the study at 48 Gynecologic
Oncology Group institutions. Four were subsequently
excluded after a central review by the pathology
committee found that the specimen was
inadequate for evaluation in the case of one patient,
the primary lesion had been misidentified in the case
of one patient, the cell type had been misidentified 
in the case of one patient, and the stage of the tumor
had been overestimated in the case of one patient.
An additional patient was also excluded because
she had received radiotherapy before entry. Three of
these patients had been randomly assigned to receive
radiotherapy alone, and two had been assigned to
receive radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with
cisplatin. Thus, a total of 369 patients were evaluated,
186 in the radiotherapy group and 183 in the
combined-therapy group.
Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic
lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13
patients (7 percent) assigned to radiotherapy alone
and 14 patients (8 percent) assigned to radiotherapy
and cisplatin. There were no significant differences
in demographic or tumor characteristics between
the two groups (Table 1). All patients had primary
cervical cancers that were at least 4 cm in diameter,
and the distribution of the tumors according to size
was similar in the two groups. There was a slightly
higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors
in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31
percent in the radiotherapy group).
Four patients assigned to the cisplatin regimen
(2 percent) received no cisplatin. A total of 164 patients
(90 percent) received four or more courses of
cisplatin. The median weekly dose of cisplatin was
39.0 mg per square meter (10th and 90th percentiles,
32.3 and 40.3, respectively; range, 0 to 49.7).
One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone
and two patients assigned to receive radiotherapy
and cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy. Otherwise,
compliance with radiotherapy with respect
to the dose, the volume, and the total treatment was
good and was similar between the two groups (Table
2). The median total treatment time was 50 days
in both groups (Table 2).
Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy
in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group
given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent)
in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin.
More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone
refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. five in
the combined-therapy group), and more patients in
this group also had an early recurrence (eight vs.
two). There were significantly more hysterectomy
specimens without detectable cancer in the combined-
therapy group than in the group given radiotherapy
alone (52 percent vs. 41 percent, P=0.04).
Adverse Effects
There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64
patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group
had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse
effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in
the group given radiotherapy alone. These reactions
consisted almost exclusively of transient hematologic
effects (39 and 3 patients in the respective groups)
and gastrointestinal effects (26 and 9 patients) (Table
3). Grade 3 hematologic toxicity was defined as
a total white-cell count of less than 2000 per cubic
millimeter, and grade 4 as a total white-cell count of
less than 1000 per cubic millimeter. Grade 3 gastrointestinal
toxicity was defined as intractable vomiting
despite treatment with antiemetic drugs that ultimately
required hospitalization, and grade 4 as dehydration,
gastrointestinal bleeding, or both. Very
few patients required surgical intervention for obstruction
or formation of a fistula, and these patients
were equally divided between the two groups. The
frequency of grade 1 (minimal) and grade 2 (mild)
genitourinary and neurologic adverse effects was
higher in the combined-therapy group.
Progression-free Survival
The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group
given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients
given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table
4). This difference predominantly reflects the fact
that there were fewer local recurrences in the combined-
therapy group (16, vs. 39 in the radiotherapy
group). At the time of this analysis, the rate of progression-
free survival was significantly higher among
patients in the combined-therapy group (P<0.001
by the log-rank test) (Fig. 1). The relative risk of recurrence
in the combined-therapy group as compared
with the group given radiotherapy alone was
0.51 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.75).
Survival
The median duration of follow-up was 36 months.
Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy
alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent),
as compared with 27 of the patients in the group
given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table
4). One patient who received cisplatin died after an
automobile accident; she had no evidence of cancer
at her last examination. The relative risk of death in
the combined-therapy group as compared with the
group given radiotherapy alone was 0.54 (95 percent
confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.86). The threeyear
survival rates were 74 percent in the group
given radiotherapy alone and 83 percent in the combined-
therapy group (P=0.008 by the log-rank test)
(Fig. 2). The numbers of patients who were alive at
the time of this analysis but in whom disease had recurred
were 20 and 11, respectively.
Prognostic Factors
Cox multiple regression analysis showed that the size
of the tumor as assessed by physical examination and
the histologic grade of the tumor were both significant
prognostic factors. Adjustment for these factors
had no significant effect on the differences between
the groups in survival and progression-free survival.
DISCUSSION
The treatment of women with bulky stage IB cervical
cancers has historically been only partially satisfactory,
with survival rates of 70 to 75 percent,
substantially below the rates of 88 to 92 percent expected
with smaller stage IB cancers. The recognition,
in some centers, that patients with bulky stage 
IB cancers had higher rates of recurrent disease
within the cervical area led to the inclusion of adjuvant
extrafascial hysterectomy in the treatment regimen
for these women.
5,6
This approach was, however,
associated with considerable morbidity.
24
The use of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy
has gradually been abandoned,
25
but there
has continued to be disagreement about the value of
the operation.
7,8
This controversy stimulated an earlier
Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients
were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomy
after radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone
(unpublished data). In 1992, when the current study
was initiated, complete data on survival in the earlier
trial were not available, but an early analysis showed
a significantly lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region
among women who underwent hysterectomy.
Therefore, we chose to test the value of concurrent
treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followed
by hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy
alone followed by hysterectomy.
Like others,
9,26
we found that the size of the tumor
was an important prognostic factor. All our patients
had cervical cancers of at least 4 cm in diameter,
and the distribution of the tumors according to
size was similar in the two treatment groups.
The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of locally
advanced cervical cancers has been uncertain.
Various drugs have been used in clinical trials and increasingly
in clinical practice in the past 15 years.
10-27
The possibility that these drugs may have additive
effects, regardless of the mechanism, when given
concurrently with radiotherapy has been the subject
of study. Cisplatin potentiates the sublethal damage
induced by radiation
28
and inhibits the repair of potentially
lethal radiation-induced damage.
29
Weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy
has been assessed in several phase 2 studies.11-15
The promising results of these studies as well as the
fact that this combination is well tolerated and easy
to administer on an outpatient basis led us to evaluate
it in this trial.
Both cisplatin and fluorouracil are active against
cancer of the cervix in patients with recurrent disease.
30,31 The effect of these two drugs in combination
with radiotherapy was compared with the effect
of hydroxyurea and radiotherapy in a randomized
phase 3 trial by the Gynecologic Oncology Group
involving patients with cervical cancer of stages IIB
through IVA (unpublished data). In that study, the
combination of concurrent radiotherapy and cisplatin-
containing chemotherapy was superior to treatment
with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy. The results
of a subsequent trial involving similar patients
are reported by Rose et al.32 in this issue of the Journal.
They compared treatment with radiation and
hydroxyurea, treatment with radiation and weekly
cisplatin, and treatment with radiation and hydroxyurea,
cisplatin, and fluorouracil and found that the
rate of relapse-free survival was significantly higher
in both regimens containing cisplatin.
In addition to these three trials, two other randomized
trials have also found that combining radiotherapy
and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy
improves survival and disease-free survival.32 The
Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, whose
results appear elsewhere in this issue of the Journal,
33 compared pelvic and para-aortic radiotherapy
with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with cisplatin
and fluorouracil in patients with clinical stage
IB through IVA cervical cancer. The Southwest Oncology
Group study compared pelvic radiotherapy
alone with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with
fluorouracil and cisplatin in high-risk patients with
involvement of lymph nodes or surgical margins
who had undergone radical hysterectomy for cervical
cancer stage IA2, IB, or IIA (unpublished data).
Both studies found that survival was increased by the
use of radiotherapy in combination with cisplatincontaining
chemotherapy.
In our trial the only difference in the protocols for
the two groups was the use of weekly infusions of cisplatin
during radiotherapy for bulky stage IB cervical
cancers. The risk of recurrence and death was significantly
reduced by concurrent treatment with cisplatin
and radiotherapy. This difference appeared to be
due to the lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region
in the combined-therapy group. Although this regimen
was also associated with higher rates of adverse
effects, these effects consisted predominantly of transient
hematologic and gastrointestinal effects, with
no evidence of an increase in other serious effects.
There was no evidence of a difference in the frequencies
of late adverse effects between the groups.
Of the 369 eligible patients in our study who were
scheduled to undergo hysterectomy after the completion
of radiotherapy, 93 percent did undergo the
surgery. We believe that the value of hysterectomy in
these patients is doubtful. In the earlier Gynecologic
Oncology Group study that assessed the value of
extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy, surgery
was associated with a significant reduction in the
rate of relapses in the pelvic region, but the overall
risk of recurrence was not significantly reduced (relative
risk, 0.76; 95 percent confidence interval, 0.52
to 1.12) and there was no significant difference in
survival (relative risk of death, 0.91). It is reasonable
to conclude on the basis of these results and our results
that the elimination of hysterectomy from both
regimens would not have affected the increase in
survival associated with the use of cisplatin. Therefore,
radiotherapy in combination with treatment
with cisplatin should be adequate for patients with
bulky stage IB cervical cancer.
The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that
we have discussed involve different stages of cervical
cancer and combinations of treatment, but they
share a common result: all five studies found that
concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy
led to better outcomes than radiotherapy alone
or in combination with treatments that did not include
cisplatin. This remarkable consistency offers a
compelling reason to consider cisplatin therapy in
combination with radiotherapy as a new standard
of care for patients with bulky stage IB, stage IIB
through IVA, and high-risk cervical cancers.