PATIENTS AND METHODS.
Patient Selection and Surgery.
The multicenter study consisted of six academic centers in former West Germany A total of 189 patients were randomized, with the first patient entered in May 1985 and the last in Apnl 1990 The study was closed in December 1992, and we present here the final status with median follow-up data of 7 years Eligible patients were required to have histologically confirmed adenocarcmoma of colon or the rectum with spread to regional lymph nodes (Dukes' C or International Unimon Agamst Cancer [UICC] stage III) In addition, hlstopathologic confirmation of curative resection (R0) was secured Radical tumor resection was performed by a standardized technique agreed upon by all participating centers When located within 15 cm of the anal verge, a tumor was classified as rectal carcinoma Patients were less than 70 years old and had a Karnofsky index greater than 50% Eleven of 99 patients randomized to treatment refused their treatment assignment, but were otherwise considered eligible for the study. According to Zelen, these patients were included in the treatment group for final analysis, although they had not received antibodies.


Stratification and Randomization.
After confirmation of histology and R0 resection of lymph node metastasis, patients were randomized into two groups one received 17-lA treatment, whereas the other served as observation controls. All patients were stratified according to Zelen 8 by the following factors participating center, sex, location of tumor, stage (Dukes' Cl or C2 equivalent to pN1 or pN2-3), number of affected lymph nodes, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level before surgery (Table 1) In the treated arm, more patients had pT2 and pT3 tumors, and fewer had pT4 tumors However, treated patients appeared to have had higher numbers of involved lymph nodes (pN2) and tumors of less differentiated histology (grade 3). However, a Fishers' exact test, companng the distnbutlon of patients according to all prognostic variables, showed no significant differences Randomlzation before consent was performed and evaluated according to Zelen 9 On approval by legal experts in 1985, this procedure was accepted by the ethical review board Statistical analyses were performed according to SAS (Statistical Analysis System, Cary, NC) To test for potential selection bias in the study, a retrospective analysis was performed at Medizimnische Hochschule Hannover on 67 Dukes' C colorectal cancer patients selected from 107 patients seen between 1980 and 1985 They fulfilled the entry criteria for the 17-1A clinical trial and were monitored for at least 5 years each The survival analysis was performed by the Instutut fur Medlzinische Informatlk und Blomathematlk, Umversltat Essen The overall survival according to Kaplan-Meier curve is nearly identical to the control group of the 17-1A trial (log-rank, P = 97), thus, this historical control does not show any selection bias.

The first 5-year analysis of the study performed by the Essen biometrical center was confirmed by two independent external audits, both of which relied on examination of original representative record samples.

Protocol Management.
Protocol management has been described in detail previously. The study performance and protocol adherence was overseen by the trial's blometncal center located at the University of Essen. In brief, patients were staged after surgery and had a chest radiogram and abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography scan. Patients in both groups were monitored in exactly the same way, with 14 prospectively defined follow-up visits, first on a quarterly and later on a half-year basis Follow-up evaluation continued beyond 5 years at yearly time points, but without formal protocol requirements. 
For the end point analysis, standardized and objectively verifiable dates were used for all patients, e, time point of surgery up to death of all cause or date of last contact alive for overall survival analysis In a separate analysis, cancer-related mortality was assessed, e, death without recurrence was not counted as an event. 

A documented histologic or radiologic diagnosis of disease was  required to confirm local or distant recurrence, whereas abnormal CEA values were not used as evidence of relapse. Recurrence was defined as time from date of surgery to date of first objective evidence of an abnormal diagnostic finding.

Antibody and Antigen.
The 17-1A antibody, a munne monoclonal mmunoglobulin IgG2a antibody, orginally described by Herlyn has a distinct antitumor effect on human xenografted tumors in a nude mouse model Clnical-grade antibody was purchased from the Wistar Institute (Philadelphia, PA), with support by the German Cancer Aid (Bonn, Germany). During the last phase of the study, 17-IA antibody was provided by Centocor (Leiden, the Netherlands). Recent data on cell lines transfected with 17-1A cDNA suggest that the antigen s involved in cell-cell adhesion. Therefore, it is now named eplthehal cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM).

Patients and Causes of Ineligibility.
Patient characteristics and distribution of risk factors for both groups were well balanced (Table 1) 3 A total of 189 patients were randomized between May 1985 and April 1990. Four patients, two in each group (2.1%), were lost to follow-up evaluation from the start and have not been included in the trial. It could be verified that neither of the two patients randomized to treatment had actually received
the antibody. Some patients have now been monitored for 10 years and only five patients were observed for a period of less than 5 years, with a range of 3.5 to 4.5 years. The presented 7-year follow-up data may therefore be considered mature and final. A final status of 185 patients could be obtained for this analysis. Nineteen patients (10.3%) were ineligible: seven in the treatment arm and 12 in the
observation arm. The main cause of ineligibihty (12 cases) was erroneous staging. Thus, eight patients had Dukes' B, four had Dukes' D, three were older than 70 years, one presented with polyposis coh, and one patient had residual tumor (R2) after surgery. One patient had a competing neoplasm and one patient received postoperative radiochemotherapy. Since ineligibility was not biased by treatment assignment, these patients were excluded from further analysis. However, eleven patients who refused their treatment assignment were considered eligible and were included in all statistical analyses as participants in the treatment group.

Survival.
After 7 years, a total of 87 deaths were observed in 166 eligible patients. Since the 5-year follow-up evaluation, four additional deaths occurred m the treated group and nine additional deaths in the control group. The death rate of the observed group was 63% (48 of 76; 95% CI, range, 48 to 78) of patients and that of the treated group was 43% (39 of 90; 95% CI, range, 31 to 58). Thus, treatment with antibody led to a relative reduction of mortality by 32% (hazards ratio, 0.57; 95% confidence interval, 8% to 51%). The KaplanMeier survival curves (Fig 1A) showed a significant benefit for patients who received antibody over those who did not receive treatment (P < .01 with Cox's proportional hazard model corrected for influence of prognostic variables, and P = .01 with log-rank test for the univariate analysis). Also, the intention-to-treat analysis (Fig B) on all 185 patients showed a significant overall benefit for the treated group (P < .01 with Cox's multivariate analysis, and P = .02 with log-rank test for the univanate analysis). Among all deaths recorded, six patients died without recurrence or secondary colorectal cancer and one observed patient of the control group died of secondary colon carcinoma, which was not counted as a recurrence. When cancer-related mortality was assessed, ie, death without recurrence was not counted as event, the benefit of treatment remained significant at P < .01 by Cox's multivariate analysis and P = .01 by log-rank test for the univariate analysis. The median survival time before death after recurrence was 1.4 years for patients randomized to treatment with 17-1A and 1.2 years for patients in the observed group. 

Recurrence. 
According to the disease-free interval analysis, tumor recurred in 96 of 166 eligible patients after 7 years of follow-up evaluation; thus, three more recurrences were recorded m the treatment group and one more in the observation arm. The calculated recurrence rate was 68% (49 of 76; 95% CI, range, 53 to 82) m the control group and 52% (47 of 90; 95% CI, range, 39 to 67) in the 17-1A group. The reduction in recurrence was 23% (hazards ratio, 0.66; 95% confidence interval, 1% to 43%) Recurrence-free intervals were plotted according to Kaplan-Maier (Fig 2). Antibody treatment increased time to recurrence (P = .04 with Cox proportional hazards model corrected for influence of prognostic variables, and P = .07 with log-rank test for umvanate analysis). In this analysis, data on patients who died without recurrence were censored. However, when death without recurrence was considered an event (recurrence-free survival), again a significant treatment advantage with 17-1A over control was obtained (P = .03 with Cox multivariate, and P = .05 with log-rank test for the umvariate analysis). When the analyses of recurrence-free interval and recurrence-free survival were performed including all randomized patients, ie, according to intention-to-treat, 17-1A treatment again led to significant advantage over the untreated group (Cox multivanate, P = .02, log-rank, P = .01, respectively). In summary, 46% of patients (41 of 90) in the treatment group are at nsk at 7 years and only 29% of patients (22 of 76) m the observed group are alive without recurrence. 

Pattern of Recurrence. 
As most of the relapse events occur in the first 2 years after resection, it is not surprising that the pattern of relapses did not show gross changes during the sixth and seventh years. When the two groups were compared with regard to the site of first recurrence, the 7-year data similar to the 5-year analysis show that significantly fewer distant recurrences occur in patients treated with the antibody than in the control arm (Fig 3). Therefore, the proposition is holding up that treatment with 17-1A may preferentially act on isolated tumor cells and thus prevent outgrowth of distant metastases. However, local relapses that occurred as the first sign of progressive disease (Fig 4) were not reduced (P = .86 with Cox multivanate analysis). As shown in Table 2, there is an excess of local recurrences in the treatment group, which may partially be explained by the longer survival of treated patients. Another reason for this difference may be local radiation applied to rectum carcinoma patients in the control group, as detailed further later. 

Toxicity.
The rather mild toxicity of 17-1A antibody has been described in detail in the 5-year report. Since only acute and no chronic adverse effects were seen, the toxicity profile was not changed during the last observation penod. There were no late treatment-related fatalities or life-threatening conditions, or any evidence for chronic drug-related side effects.

Immune Response to 17-1A Antibody. 
When tested for antibody response against murine antibody (HAMA), 80% of treated patients developed a distinct HAMA response after the second or third nfusion. Patients who developed recurrences and those who remained tumorfree did not show a difference in antibody titers. The kinetics of the HAMA response in the two subgroups have been described in the 5-year report. In brief, after the first two infusions, antibody titers were low and reached their maximum only after a fifth nfusion at 18 to 20 weeks after surgery, but remained detectable for 2 more years. As will be reported elsewhere, the serum levels of antiidlotyplc antibodies (Ab2) showed no significant differences between the analyzed patients who remained tumor free (n = 30) or experienced a relapse (n = 30). 

