THE CURRENT PESSIMISTIC VIEW of unconjugated monoclonal antibodies as cancer therapeutics has been largely influenced by the negative outcome of multiple clinical trials initiated shortly after introduction of the hybridoma technology. Thus, it comes as no surprise that recent reports on some successes obtained with antibody therapy in lymphoma, breast, and colorectal carcinoma were met with great reserve. Wondering what the characteristic features of these trials were, one notes that two of these trials, one in lymphoma and one in breast carcinoma, 2 had been performed with engineered antibodies, ie, either human/ murine chimeric or human complementanly defining regious (CDR)-grafted mmunoglobulins respectively, while the third stands out because of the target and end point used. In contrast to other trials aimed at patients with larger metastatic tumor masses and using regression or shrinkage as the end point, this one on colorectal cancer of stage Dukes' C required microscopically complete resection of the primary tumor for patients to be admitted.3 As the primary end point, overall-survival was determined at 5 years. Here, we report on the 7-year follow-up study of this prospective randomized two-arm trial in minimal residual disease that used the murine 17-1A antibody, 4 which recognizes a 34-kd glycoprotein of the cell membrane of epithelial cells.5 The 5-year analysis had shown that a short, albeit intensive, postoperative course of antibody treatment (900 mg total dose) significantly reduced the appearance of distant metastases, but did not affect the rate of local relapses. However, local metastases may not be as innocuous as generally thought. As recently shown for breast carcinoma, without regional radiation therapy, occult local metastases can give rise to distant metastases after many years and thus affect long-term survival. 6 ,7 Therefore, with no effect of antibody therapy on the local relapse at 5 years, It was of interest to know how the overall survival evolved at the 7-year follow-up evaluation. This analysis also invalidated objections concerned about the maturity of the reported 5-year follow-up study. Now, after a median observation time of 7 years, with only four of 185 patients monitored for less than 5 years, the study has matured and continues to demonstrate a significant benefit with regard to survival. 
