Many steroid and peptide hormones, growth factors, and other trophic substances are involved in the  growth regulation of breast cancer. Endocrine treatment of breast cancer is designed to decrease  plasma concentrations of one or more of these hormones and growth factors or to inhibit the  biologic effects of these trophic substances directly in the tumor cell. Deprivation or antagonism  of estradiol, a growth-stimulating hormone for estrogen-dependent breast cancers, is especially  important. Endocrine therapy for breast cancer consists of a variety of medical and surgical  ablative treatments. For premenopausal patients with metastatic breast cancer, the classic  treatment is ovariectomy. After DeSombre et al. showed that a luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone  (LHRH) analogue could induce tumor regression in an experimental tumor model system, the results of  the first clinical study with an LHRH analogue were reported by Klijn and de Jong. Since then, a  series of more than 13 phase II studies with various LHRH agonists, such as goserelin, buserelin,  and others, have shown an objective response in 161 (38%) of 419 patients. Overall, the objective
response rate in estrogen receptor-positive tumors was 50%. Although direct antitumor effects of  LHRH analogues have been demonstrated in vitro and specific LHRH-binding sites have been found in  52%–67% of primary human breast cancers, the main mechanism of action of LHRH analogues is medical  castration. The application of depot formulations (long-acting subcutaneous or intramuscular  implants) of various LHRH agonists caused long-term suppression of ovarian estrogen secretion  (14,16–18). A recent randomized study of 138 premenopausal patients with estrogen receptor-positive  and progesterone receptor-positive metastatic breast cancer showed that treatment with the LHRH  agonist goserelin resulted in failure-free survival and overall survival similar to those observed after ovariectomy.

Tamoxifen is now the standard first-line therapy for postmenopausal metastatic breast cancer and is  also accepted as an alternative to ovariectomy in premenopausal patients. Based on eight phase II  and two phase III clinical studies involving a total of 348 premenopausal patients treated with tamoxifen, an objective response was observed in 103 patients (30%). However, the group of  premenopausal women treated with tamoxifen had very high levels of plasma estradiol, sometimes for  many years, because of the tamoxifen-induced stimulation of pituitary–ovarian functions. The possible deleterious effects of these high levels of plasma estradiol, which can compete with  tamoxifen for binding to estrogen receptors, have been debated for many years. Furthermore, only  two relatively small studies have compared the effectiveness of surgical castration with that of  tamoxifen and showed no major differences in results. However, no definite conclusions can be  reached from these studies, but see also because the power of each was very low. In contrast, for hormone-dependent breast cancer cells, in vitro studies have shown that long-term withdrawal of  estrogens increased the sensitivity of these cells to estradiol, suggesting that the addition of an  antiestrogen might be valuable. Combined treatment with LHRH analogues and other endocrine agents,  such as tamoxifen, therefore, is of great interest. Endocrine studies showed that an LHRH agonist  given subcutaneously completely suppressed the tamoxifenstimulation of pituitary and ovarian  functions and resulted in plasma estrogen levels that were comparable to normal postmenopausal levels. Thus, combination treatment with an LHRH agonist and tamoxifen can induce a so-called  “complete estrogen blockade,” which is the suppression of plasma estradiol levels by the LHRH  agonist and blockade of the estrogen receptor by the antiestrogen. Previously, Klijn and Foekens   and Nicholson et al.  reported, in small nonrandomized studies, that a combined treatment of  buserelin or goserelin with an antisteroidal agent increased the duration of response.

To test the hypothesis further, we designed a three-arm study to assess the antitumor and endocrine  effects of long-term firstline combined endocrine treatment with buserelin (an LHRH agonist) and  tamoxifen compared with treatment with each drug alone. To our knowledge, this study is the only  three-arm, randomized study to investigate these treatments for metastatic breast cancer in  premenopausal women. 

PATIENTS AND METHODS.
Patients and Treatment.
During the period from 1988 through 1995, a total of 161 patients were recruited by 17 centers from  nine countries. The patients were premenopausal and had metastatic or locally advanced breast  cancer. They were equally and randomly assigned to one of three treatment groups according to  European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) protocol 10881 approved by the  Protocol Review Committee of the EORTC (Table 1). Stratification factors for the randomization  included centers, receptor status, diseasefree interval, and stage of disease (metastatic or  locally advanced). All patients entered in this study were informed of the investigational nature  of the study and provided informed consent in accordance with institutional guidelines. A  premenopausal woman was defined as a woman who had a menstrual period less than 3 months before  randomization. All patients had histologically proved breast cancer with at least one measurable  lesion or a lesion that could be evaluated at the start of treatment. Eligibility criteria also  included a positive estrogen receptor and/or progesterone receptor status (ù10 fmol/mg of protein),  irrespective of the duration of the disease-free interval, or an unknown steroid receptor status  and a disease-free interval of at least 2 years or longer.

The following patients were excluded from the study: those with tumors that were both estrogen  receptor negative and progesterone receptor negative, those with a poor performance status (World  Health Organization [WHO] status of >3), those with rapidly progressing life-threatening disease  (including extensive liver metastases, carcinomatous lymphangitic disease of the lungs, or central
nervous system metastases), those with increased concentrations of plasma bilirubin (>30 mmol/L) or  creatinine (>150 mmol/L), those with other concurrent or past malignancies (with the exception of  adequately treated basal or squamous cell cancer of the skin and in situ carcinoma of the cervix),  and those who were pregnant. Patients with previous systemic endocrine or chemotherapeutic  treatment for advanced disease were not eligible. However, patients with previous adjuvant treatment with tamoxifen and/or chemotherapy were allowed if they had received no adjuvant  chemotherapy for at least 6 months, if they had received no treatment with tamoxifen for more than  1 year before entry, and if amenorrhea had not occurred. Patients were randomly assigned by the  EORTC Data Center to receive one of three first-line treatments (Table 1). These treatments were 1)  buserelin implants (6.6 mg implanted subcutaneously every 8 weeks; during the first 12 weeks, every  6 weeks), 2) a daily dose of tamoxifen (40 mg administered orally), or 3) a combination of both  drugs at the same dosages. When disease progression was detected, a crossover of drugs (tamoxifen
after buserelin or buserelin after tamoxifen) in the single-treatment arms was advised but was not  mandatory. Second-line treatment was left to the discretion of the local investigator in view of  the highly heterogeneous conditions of individual patients during the course of metastatic disease,  which required individually designed treatments. However, to be informed about the course of the
disease from the time of tumor progression, survival curves from time to failure of first-line  treatment were constructed. 

Methods and Follow-up.
Patients were clinically evaluated every 6 weeks for the first 12 weeks and every 8 weeks  thereafter until disease progression. At each visit, all complaints, vaginal bleeding, hot flashes,  and other side effects were recorded, in addition to medications taken and performance status. At  each visit, a physical examination, measurement of palpable lesions, and limited blood tests  (alkaline phosphatase and g-glutamyltransferase) were also carried out. Complete routine hematology
and blood chemistry were done every 16 weeks. Objective clinical assessment included specific  x-rays, computed tomography scans of liver lesions, and photographs of skin metastasis every 8–16  weeks, as appropriate, and bone scans every 6 months. In nearly all centers, plasma estradiol  levels were measured every 6–8 weeks during the first year and every 16 weeks thereafter by  institutional standard assays. Values below the detection level of the respective estradiol
assays were given the limiting value of the assay. Between centers, the upper levels of normal  postmenopausal plasma concentrations varied from 19 pg/mL to 38 pg/mL. For a patient treated longer  than 1 year and who had more than one plasma estradiol determination per year, the average  estradiol value per year for that patient was used. Steroid receptor determinations were performed  by a ligand-binding assay according to guidelines of the EORTC Biomarker Study Group (30), by  enzyme immunoassays (31), or infrequently by immunohistochemistry. Response to treatment was  assessed by use of standard criteria of the International Union Against Cancer (32). For patients  with bone metastases and a complete response, complete remineralization of lytic lesions in the  bone was required, or, for a partial response, a clear improvement accompanied by a decrease in pain was required. Bisphosphonates were not used in this study. The Data Center and the  study coordinator reviewed all forms.

Statistical Analysis.
The study was designed to compare the objective response rate of the combined treatment with the  objective response rate of the single-drug arms and to detect an increase from 40% to 60% in this  rate. Therefore, the aim was to accrue 116 patients in each arm to reach a power of 80% for a  two-sided test with an a value of .05. Accrual to the study was slower than expected and, because  of the decreasing accrual and the rapidly increasing application and duration of systemic adjuvant  therapy, the EORTC Breast Cancer Cooperative Group decided to terminate the study prematurely after  7 years. In our analysis of the three treatment arms, we compared two time-to-event end points,  progression-free survival and overall survival, as well as one ordered categorical end point,  objective response rate, which consisted of four categories (i.e., complete remission, partial  remission, no change, and progressive disease). For the time-to-event end points, an overall test  for the difference among the three treatment groups was based on the log-rank test (33) of data  from all patients (intent-to-treat principle). The three treatment arms were also compared pairwise by the log-rank test. With the use of an overall statistical significance level of 5%,  each pairwise comparison was tested at the 2% level according to Tukey’s multiple comparisons  method (34). Survival curves for the three treatment groups were estimated by the Kaplan–Meier  technique (35). In addition,stratified analyses were done for the time-to-event end points, based  on the Cox proportional hazards model (36) with the use of patient characteristics for which there appeared to be an imbalance as stratification factors (e.g., WHO performance status). If the  stratified and unstratified analyses led to similar results, results of the more simple  unstratified analysis are shown.

Furthermore, the effect of four prognostic factors—i.e., disease-free interval (<2 years or ù2  years), age (ø40 years or >40 years), dominant site of disease (soft tissue, bone, or visceral),  and adjuvant chemotherapy (yes or no)—on progression-free survival was studied and tested by the  log-rank test. For the prognostic factors that statistically significantly influenced  progression-free survival, a Cox proportional hazards model was fitted with and without the  interaction between the treatment and the prognostic factor. A test for interaction used the  likelihood ratio test to compare these two models (37). The test for the objective response rate  was based on the Kruskal–Wallis test (38). All patients who could be evaluated for response were  used. In addition, the four categories were combined into two categories—i.e., responders  (containing the categories complete remission and partial remission) and nonresponders
(containing the categories no change and progressive disease)—and a x2 test was done on this binary  variable (39). The three treatment arms were also compared pairwise by the x2 test. Again, each  pairwise comparison was tested at the statistical significance level of .02. A separate but similar  analysis was performed after adding data from patients who had had stable disease for more than
6 months to the objective response category (complete remission, partial remission, and no change  for >6 months). The same four prognostic factors were studied for the binary response variable and  were tested with a x2 test. If a statistically significant effect was obtained, a logistic  regression model with and without the interaction term was fitted, and the two models were again  compared by the likelihood ratio test corresponding to a test for interaction. All P values
are from two-sided tests. 

RESULTS.
Patient and Tumor Characteristics.
During the period from 1988 through 1995, a total of 161 patients were recruited by 17 centers from  nine countries as follows: 64 patients from The Netherlands, 39 from France, 23 from Belgium, 16  from South Africa, eight from Poland, six from Spain, three from Austria, one from Germany, and one from Hungary. Nine patients were ineligible and were not evaluated, and seven additional eligible  patients could not be evaluated. These 16 patients could not be evaluated because of missing  information (eight patients) or protocol violations (eight patients). The protocol violations  included incorrect receptor status (three patients), postmenopausal status (one patient),  neoadjuvant chemotherapy (one patient), brain metastasis (one patient), treatment refusal (one  patient), and early termination of tamoxifen after 3 days because of hot flashes (one patient).  Thus, data from 145 patients could be evaluated for response (Table 1). The median follow-up of all  161 patients was 7.3 years. In total, 149 patients showed disease progression and 122 (76%) of the 161 patients died, all of breast cancer. The patient and tumor characteristics were well balanced  over the three treatment groups (Table 2). A statistically significant difference was observed only for performance status, showing a slightly more favorable distribution in the group treated  with tamoxifen. In addition, there was a trend to less visceral disease in the group treated with buserelin alone.

Antitumor Efficacy and Survival.
Excluding patients who could not be evaluated, the objective response rate (complete remission and  partial remission) was better in the group treated with the combination therapy (23 of 48 patients;  48%) than in the groups treated with buserelin alone (16 of 47 patients; 34%) or tamoxifen alone  (14 of 50 patients; 28%) (Table 3). Taking all four types of response into account, there was a  statistically significant difference in the objective response between the three treatment groups  by the Kruskal–Wallis test (P 4 .031). If the four categories of response were combined into two  categories (complete remission and partial remission versus no change and progressive disease), the  difference in the response rate between the three treatment groups was not statistically  significant (x2 test; P 4.11). When we include the data from the 16 patients who could not be  evaluated in the second category (no change and progressive disease), the same P values (both P 4  .13) resulted. However, when data from patients with stable disease for more than 6 months were  added to the objective response category (complete remission, partial remission, and no change for  >6 months), the objective response rate was statistically significantly better (P 4 .007) in the  group with combination therapy (36 of 48 patients; 75%) than in the groups treated with buserelin  alone (29 of 47 patients; 62%) or tamoxifen alone (22 of 50 patients; 44%). 

Compared with patients in the combined-treatment arm, patients treated with buserelin alone or  tamoxifen alone had a lower chance of having an objective response (complete remission and partial  remission; odds ratios of 0.56 and 0.42, respectively). Response rates in patients in the  single-treatment arms compared with those in the combined-treatment arm were different and led to  unadjusted P values of .169 for buserelin and .042 for tamoxifen. In contrast, the response rates  in patients treated with buserelin alone and in patients treated with tamoxifen alone were much  more similar (P 4 .52).

The three treatment arms differed statistically significantly from each other with regard to  progression-free survival (Table 3), with the median times to disease progression being 9.7 months  for patients in the combined-treatment group, 6.3 months for patients treated with buserelin alone,  and 5.6 months for patients treated with tamoxifen alone (P 4 .03; overall logrank test) (Fig. 1).  Presently, the longest duration of response and the longest duration of administration of combined  treatment are more than 11 years. Compared with patients in the combined-treatment arm, patients  treated with buserelin or tamoxifen alone showed poor progression-free survival, with hazard ratios  of 1.65 (95% confidence interval [CI] 4 1.09–2.49) and 1.50 (95% CI 4 1.01–2.24), respectively  (Table 3).

Separate comparisons of the single-treatment arms to the combined-treatment arm showed differences  in progression-free survival for both single-treatment arms and led to unadjusted P values of .008  for buserelin and .047 for tamoxifen. Progression free survival values for patients treated with  buserelin alone and for patients treated with tamoxifen alone were very similar (P4.71).  Thirty-five (66%) of the 53 patients in the combined treatment group died, 43 (80%) of the 54  patients in the group treated with buserelin alone died, and 44 (81%) of the 54 patients in the  group treated with tamoxifen alone died. The overall log-rank test for overall survival showed that  these values were statistically significantly different (P 4 .01) (Fig. 2). Separate comparisons of  overall survival among patients in the single-treatment arms and in the combined-treatment arm  showed that these values were statistically significantly different, with unadjusted P values of  .006 for buserelin and .029 for tamoxifen. Overall survival values in the groups treated with  buserelin alone and tamoxifen alone were again similar (P 4 .33). The median overall survival was  longer in patients after combined treatment (3.7 years) than in patients after treatment with  buserelin alone (2.5 years) or tamoxifen alone (2.9 years) (P 4 .01) (Table 3). The death hazard  ratios for patients treated with buserelin alone or tamoxifen alone were 1.95 (95% CI 4 1.23–3.10)  and 1.63 (95% CI 4 1.03–2.59), respectively, when compared with patients receiving the combined  treatment. 

The 5-year actuarial survival was higher for patients in the combined-treatment group (34.2%; 95%  CI 4 20.4%–48.0%), with a difference of 15.8%–19.3% in comparison to that for patients treated with  buserelin alone (14.9%; 95% CI 43.9%–25.9%) or tamoxifen alone (18.4%; 95% CI 4 7.0%–29.8%) (Table  3). Even when additional stratified log-rank tests were done, because of a slight imbalance in  performance status (in favor of the tamoxifen treatment group), the results and conclusions did not change, indicating that the combined treatment was always better than the single-drug treatments. For survival after disease progression, there was a borderline statistically significant difference  among the three treatment arms (P 4 .06), with the median time to death from disease progression  being 29 months for patients in the combined-treatment group, 18.3 months for patientstreated with  buserelin alone, and 27.1 months for patients treated with tamoxifen alone (Fig. 3). Compared with  patients receiving combined treatment, patients treated with buserelin alone or tamoxifen alone  showed hazard ratios of 1.7–1.45 for survival after disease progression. For survival after disease  progression, comparison of the single-treatment arms with the combined treatment arm showed  differences, with unadjusted P values of .03 for buserelin alone and .088 for tamoxifen alone.  Survival values for the group treated with buserelin alone and for the group treated with tamoxifen  alone were very similar (P 4 .41).

Prognostic Factors.
The disease-free interval was the only prognostic factor that had a statistically significant  effect on progression-free survival (P 4 .011) and overall survival (P 4 .02). Patients with a  disease-free interval of 2 years or longer had a median time to disease progression of 8.3 months,  and patients with a disease-free interval of less than 2 years had a median time to disease  progression of 6.4 months. The median time to death was 39.9 months for patients with a  disease-free interval of 2 or more years; it was 32 months for patients with a disease-free  interval of less than 2 years. The interaction between treatment and disease-free interval, however, was not statistically significant for progression-free survival (P 4 .43) and overall survival (P 4 .93). 

The dominant site of disease was the only prognostic factor that had a statistically significant  effect on the objective response rate (P4.021). The objective response rate was 59% for patients  with soft-tissue disease, 27% for patients with bone metastases, and 39% for patients with visceral  metastases. The interaction between treatment and dominant site, however, was not statistically  significant (P 4 .078), although this interaction test is not powerful and is based on a restricted  number of patients in each subgroup.

Endocrine Effects on Plasma Estradiol Levels and Menstrual Cycle and Side Effects 
All patients with at least one estradiol measurement result before and/or during treatment were  included in the endocrine study. Because of missing data and the decreasing number of patients  without progressive disease, the number of patients evaluated decreased during follow-up (Table 4).  In the two groups of patients treated with buserelin alone or buserelin with tamoxifen, both the  median and the mean levels of plasma estradiol dropped to normal postmenopausal values within 6  weeks and remained suppressed throughout treatment in all patients (Table 4 and Fig. 4). In the  group treated with tamoxifen alone, however, plasma estradiol levels increased on average threefold to fourfold in nearly all patients. In the same patients, this increase fluctuated widely  during treatment but persisted for years throughout treatment with values of 1000 pg/mL or more (Table 4). Some patients could not be evaluated for amenorrhea and/or hot flashes because of a  short period of treatment caused by early progressive disease, a prior hysterectomy without  ovariectomy, or missing data. Hot flashes occurred less frequently (P<.001) during treatment with  tamoxifen alone (17 of 43 patients; 40%) than during treatment with buserelin alone (38 of 43  patients; 88%) or during the combination treatment (41 of 47 patients; 87%). Amenorrhea also  developed less often (P<.001) during treatment with tamoxifen (nine of 38 patients; 24%) than  during treatment with buserelin alone (39 of 40 patients; 98%) or combined treatment (44 of 44  patients; 100%). Nausea was reported by five patients (three with WHO grade 1 and two with WHO grade 2; 12%) treated with tamoxifen alone, one patient (grade 1) receiving combined treatment, and  no patients treated with buserelin alone. Nausea in the group treated with tamoxifen alone might  have been partly related to the high plasma levels of estradiol that were comparable to those  observed during pregnancy. Three patients in the group treated with tamoxifen alone experienced  abdominal pain and discomfort caused by ovarian cysts (one underwent ovariectomy for that reason), one reported menometrorrhagia, and one reported visual disturbances. No endometrial carcinoma was  reported. Overall, only two (1.2%) of 161 patients, both (i.e., two [3.7%] of 54) treated with  tamoxifen alone, stopped treatment because of side effects (severe hot flashes).

DISCUSSION.
Surgical ovariectomy has been used for the last 100 years as treatment for advanced breast cancer in premenopausal patients. Phase II studies of medical treatment with tamoxifen (5) or LHRH agonists showed response rates that were similar to those observed after
surgical castration. Two randomized studies comparing surgical ovariectomy with tamoxifen and two  other randomized studies comparing surgical ovariectomy with the LHRH agonist goserelin have been  reported. Those studies showed that medical treatment and surgical ablation are equally effective. Therefore, it was not surprising that, in our three-arm randomized study, we did not find  statistically significant differences in any of the three end points tested between groups treated  with tamoxifen alone or buserelin alone. However, most reported randomized studies had a relatively  low power. Therefore, the possibility of minor differences cannot be excluded. To detect such small  differences, very large studies are required. From an endocrine point of view, treatment with  tamoxifen and buserelin resulted in important differences. Patients treated with tamoxifen alone  had levels of plasma estradiol that were threefold to fourfold higher than pretreatment values, and the elevated levels persisted for several years. In contrast, patients treated with buserelin alone  had postmenopausal levels of estradiol. Plasma estradiol levels induced by treatment with buserelin  alone were similar to those reported for (shortterm) treatment with goserelin [i.e., mean values of  20–23 pg/mL]. Our combined-treatment regimen of buserelin and tamoxifen completely suppressed the  tamoxifen-stimulated pituitary–ovarian axis and resulted in plasma estrogen levels that were  similar to those observed during treatment with buserelin alone. In our trial, progression-free  survival (P 4 .03) and overall survival (P 4 .01) in the group receiving combined treatment were  statistically significantly superior to those in the groups receiving single-drug treatment (Figs.  1 and 2). Combined treatment also had a 14%–20% higher objective response rate, although the  difference in response rate was not statistically significant (P 4 .11; Table 3). However, when  disease that was stable for more than 6 months was included in the objective response category, the  differences in clinical benefit in terms of response rate were highly statistically significant (P  4.007).

Thus far, only two randomized studies that compared a combined treatment (LHRH agonist and  tamoxifen) and treatment with a single LHRH agonist (goserelin) have been reported, and one study  in Japan is ongoing. However, none of these three studies included a third arm with tamoxifen  alone. An arm for treatment with tamoxifen alone is desirable from a scientific point of view  because it can be used to prove that the benefit of combined treatment is not simply caused by  tamoxifen.

A small Italian study of 85 patients that had a two by-two factorial study design and 18–24  patients per treatmentgroup demonstrated a higher response rate in patients treated with goserelin  plus tamoxifen (45%) than in patients treated with goserelin alone (27%). Although this difference  of 18% is comparable to the results of our study, it was not statistically significant because of  the low number of patients in the study. In addition, no differences with respect to survival and  the results of surgical castration were observed. A second, larger international study of 318  patients showed, in concordance with our study, a statistically significantly improved progression-free survival after combined treatment compared with that after a single treatment with goserelin  (P 4 .03) but no statistically significant improvement in the survival or objective response rate (38% versus 31%). However, patients with estrogen receptor-negative tumors or an unknown  estrogen receptor status,irrespective of the length of the disease-free interval, were also  included in this study, which “diluted” the patient population with patients who had  hormone-resistant breast cancer. However, within the subgroup of 115 patients with skeletal  metastases only, statistically significant differences in favor of combination therapy were seen  for the objective response rate,time to disease progression, and survival. Furthermore, preliminary
results of a recent meta-analysis of 506 patients treated in four randomized trials (including this  study) showed that, for all three efficacy parameters (i.e., response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival), combined treatment with an LHRH agonist plus tamoxifen was  superior to treatment with an LHRH agonist alone. Unfortunately, a meta-analysis on comparisons between a combined-treatment arm and treatment with tamoxifen alone is not possible because of the  lack of such studies.

In our study, there appeared to be no interaction between clinical prognostic factors and  treatment. In unselected patients with visceral disease, endocrine treatment is generally less  effective, which, however, is mainly due to the association with negative steroid receptor status.  Probably because we excluded steroid receptor-negative patients, visceral metastasis was not an  important prognostic factor for progression-free survival and overall survival, but a relative high  overall response rate of 39% for all treatment groups together was found (even about 60% during  combined treatment). The overall survival of patients with metastatic breast cancer is commonly  comparable for combined endocrine treatment and sequential treatment. In our study, we did not  include a mandatory crossover for the single-treatment groups because crossover studies are  difficult to conduct well. The highly heterogeneous conditions of individual patients during the course of metastatic disease require various treatment approaches. However, we believe that there  should be no major difference among the three arms of our study with regard to subsequent treatment  regimens because the patients were randomly assigned according to individual center and were  treated during the same study period with the same type of chemotherapeutic and endocrine agents.  Thus, the most striking observation in our study is the highly statistically significant  improvement in overall survival of patients receiving the combination treatment.

This improvement could be the result of a higher response rate and longer progression-free survival  after reduction to a substantially lower tumor load. The greater reduction in tumor load might have  increased the sensitivity of the tumor to other types of subsequent treatment because of the  general relationship between tumor load and resistance to treatment. Thus, our unexpected  observation that patients receiving the combined first-lineendocrine treatment tended to survive  longer after disease progression (Fig. 3) is important—this in spite of the fact that fewer  optional endocrine treatments were available for this group from the time of detection of  progressive disease during first-line endocrine therapy. The results of our study may also aid in  the interpretation of results from published and ongoing (adjuvant) studies on standard-dose and  high-dose chemotherapy. Adjuvant chemotherapy is more effective in premenopausal women than in  postmenopausal women , and this effect is positively associated with chemotherapeutically induced  castration in nearly all trials. Ablation of functioning ovaries and combination chemotherapy with  cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil (CMF) have similar effects on disease-free  survival and overall survival. High-dose chemotherapy induces chemical castration in nearly 100% of  the patients, in contrast to standard dose chemotherapy, and high-dose chemotherapy is followed by adjuvant tamoxifen therapy in nearly all trials. Thus, the combination of high-dose chemotherapy  and tamoxifen can also indirectly result in “complete estrogen blockade” in (nearly) all patients,  in contrast to standard treatment. Consequently, a small difference in survival in favor of  high-dose chemotherapy can (at least partly) be explained by differences in indirect endocrine effects. This hypothesis is supported by the results of two randomized trials that show that  adjuvant endocrine therapy,consisting of surgical or medical castration and treatment with  tamoxifen, was statistically significantly superior to standard chemotherapy with FAC  (5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin [i.e.,Adriamycin], and cyclophosphamide)  or CMF , although  preliminary results of a third adjuvant study  did not reveal a difference between the results of  treatment with CMF and the results of treatment with the LHRH agonist goserelin and tamoxifen.  Recently, in addition to combination chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and  5-fluorouracil (CAF), combined treatment with goserelin and tamoxifen was shown to statistically  significantly improve the disease-free survival (from 67% to 78%), but treatment with goserelin  alone did not. Therefore, it is important to determine whether the additional beneficial effect of  combined endocrine therapy was reached, especially in women without chemotherapy-induced  castration.

In conclusion, our unique three-arm, randomized study clearly showed that combined treatment with  an LHRH agonist plus tamoxifen is superior to treatment with each drug alone, with respect to  response rate, progression-free survival, and overall survival among premenopausal patients with  metastatic breast cancer. Therefore, the results of our study are important for daily standard  clinical practice, not only for patients with metastatic disease but also for patients with steroid  receptorpositive primary tumors. We suggest that future studies also add aromatase inhibitors to  the combined-treatment regimen; this treatment should further suppress plasma estradiol levels.