Certain clinical and pathologic risk factors for Stage 1 cervical cancer recurrence have been identified. Pelvic lymph node metastases, for example have been known to decrease the 5-year survival from 82 to 90% in patients with negative nodes to 38 to 61% in patients with positive lymph nodes. Furthermore, that study estimated that the proportion of women with such risk factors was 25% of all Stage IB cervical cancer patients with negative lymph nodes. In 1988 the GOG initiated a prospective randomized study (GOG #92), reported here, to investigate the benefits and risks of adjuvant radiotherapy for Stage I cervical cancer patients treated by conventional radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy and who were at high risk for recurrence, because of LTD, DSI, CLS, but excluding patients with lymph node metastases.

PATIENTS AND METHODS
Study Design
The GOG #92 multicenter prospective randomized study was designed to determine whether postoperative pelvic radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy and pelvic node dissection would reduce the rate of recurrence and decrease the mortality in Stage IB cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep stromal invasion by tumor, and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces found on microscopic examination. Women with one of the combinations of risk factors as defined in Table 1 were eligible to enter this study. 

The study’s target sample size was set at 169 eligible patients based on a desire to detect a 55% decrease in recurrence rate (exponential model with l 5 0.01 recurrences/month) with the use of radiation therapy. The revised sample size goal was 260 patients and the final analysis of recurrence-free interval would occur once 60 recurrences were observed. Tumor diameter was estimated by palpation. Radiation Therapy
Patients received external beam irradiation and no brachytherapy. Imbalances between patient and disease characteristics and treatment regimens was accomplished using the Pearson’s x2 test. RESULTS
There were 128 (46%) patients with the risk factors of positive CLS and deep one-third stromal invasion, 65 (23%) had positive CLS, middle third stromal invasion and tumor size $2 cm, 82 (30%) had negative CLS, middle or deep third stromal invasion and a $4-cm tumor, and 2 (0.7%) had positive CLS, superficial stromal invasion, and tumor size $5 cm (Table 3). The distribution of individual risk factors between the treatment regimen was somewhat imbalanced. There was a disproportionately larger number of patients with positive CLS among the NFT regimen (24% versus 35%) and more patients with .4 cm diameter tumors in the RT regimen (62% versus 54%). One patient discontinued radiotherapy due to an adverse reaction after receiving 21.6 Gy. Thirty-nine (27.9%) of the 140 women in the NFT group developed cancer recurrence, 27 (19.3%) local (vagina or pelvis), and 10 (7.1%) distant. By contrast, there were only 21 (15.3%) cancer recurrences, 18 (13.1%) local and 3 (2.2%) distant among the 137 patients treated with postoperative radiation. The site of recurrence was unknown for 2 patients. Notably, there were only 2 isolated vaginal vault recurrences in the irradiated group versus 8 among the NFT patients. The crude estimate in the reduction in risk in patients receiving adjuvant radiotherapy was 47% (i.e., relative risk 5 0.53) with the recurrence-free rate of 88% in the radiotherapy group and 79% in the no-further-therapy group at 2 years (Fig. 1). Within 2 years on study, there are eight and three patients in the RT group and NFT group, respectively. The difference between treatment groups remained statistically significant. The risk factors used to select patients for this study have been investigated and reported in the literature. lymph node metastases, recurrence, and poorer survival. Sedlis et al., in a GOG study of microinvasive cervical carcinoma, reported two deaths among the 23% patients with vascular spread. The formula combining the three risk factors that we used to determine patient eligibility may appear complicated. A detailed GOG clinical pathologic study had established that certain patients with poor prognostic factors related to the primary tumor (i.e., large tumor size, deep stromal invasion, and capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement) but without lymph node involvement had a risk of recurrence of 31% after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy. The present prospective randomized study showed that adjunctive radiotherapy significantly reduced the number of cancer recurrences in women with the above risk factors by 44% and that the difference in recurrences between irradiated and nonirradiated patients was statistically significant at the P 5 0.019 level. The use of adjuvant radiotherapy to improve the outcome in the Stage I cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep invasion, and CLS has been previously proposed. Interestingly, our prospective study did provide conclusive evidence of pelvic radiotherapy being effective in women with primary tumor-related risk factors but negative nodes. A significant number of women with Stage IB cervical cancer should benefit from adjuvant pelvic irradiation because 25% of the lymph-node negative patients have high risk factors according to the 1990 GOG data. Since the node-negative group accounts for one-half of all Stage IB cervical cancer deaths adjuvant radiotherapy for women with risk factors should substantially reduce the overall Stage IB mortality. Increased morbidity in patients receiving full course radiotherapy following radical surgery for cervical cancer has been reported. 

