A prospective, randomized, sequential, crossover trial of large-volume versus normal-volume leukapheresis procedures: effect on progenitor cells and engraftment


Peripheral blood progenitor cell (PBPC) transplantation
has become a widely accepted therapeutic
option for patients with chemotherapy-sensitive
malignancies. The transfusion of PBPCs offers
several advantages over bone marrow transplantation. Collection
of PBPCs can be performed without general anesthesia,
engraftment is faster, and supportive care and costs
are reduced. PBPCs are harvested by leukapheresis after
mobilization with chemotherapy and/or granulocyte–
colony-stimulating factor (G–CSF) or granulocyte-macrophage–
CSF (GM–CSF).
The number of progenitor cells in the harvest is usually
quantified by immunophenotyping for CD34+ cells6
and/or by evaluating the proliferative potential through
measurement of colony-forming units–granulocyte-macrophage
(CFU–GM). Several studies have been able to
demonstrate a good correlation between the number of
CD34+ cells in the harvest and the number of CFU–GM.
Until now, the minimal number of transplanted PBPCs
required for safe and sustained engraftment remains to be determined. Thus, recommendations for transplantation
dosages range from 1.0 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of body
weight (BW) to more than 5.0 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of
BW in some centers and from 1.0 × 105 CFU–GM per kg of
BW to more than 5.0 × 105 CFU–GM per kg of BW in other
centers. Recent data suggest that patients being given more
than 15 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW may benefit with
regard to hematopoietic recovery.
The yield of CD34+ cells obtained by leukapheresis is
significantly influenced by the extent and duration of
prior chemotherapy, therapy with stem cell-toxic drugs
such as carmustine or melphalan, and extensive radiotherapy.
In some uncontrolled studies, an influence of the
leukapheresis size on the number of PBPCs in the harvest
was observed. Large-volume leukapheresis (LVL) is defined
either by processing a minimum of 15 L of peripheral
blood or by processing more than three times the total
peripheral blood volume. LVL can cause an additional
intrapheresis recruitment of PBPCs. It has been suggested
that it might be possible to harvest sufficient numbers
of PBPCs for transplantation by one LVL only. In 50
percent of previously treated patients it has been possible
to harvest more than 1.0 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW in
a single LVL procedure. However, these favorable results
could not be confirmed in all investigations. Recently, it was
suggested that the recruitment of PBPCs during LVL does
not occur in small children at all, and that in older children
the effect might be less pronounced than it is in adults.
In addition, patient tolerance may limit the clinical use of
LVL.
We therefore performed a prospective, randomized,
sequential crossover trial in patients with breast cancer (BC)
or non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) to evaluate the effect
of LVL compared with normal-volume leukapheresis (NVL)
on the absolute number of harvested
CD34+ cells and on the extraction efficacy,
defined as the difference between
the yield in the harvest and the
decrease in the total number of
CD34+ cells in peripheral blood during
leukapheresis.
MATERIALS AND
METHODS
Study design
All patients admitted for PBPC mobilization
and harvest between September
1995 and June 1997 were
evaluated for inclusion in the study,
which had been approved by the Institutional
Ethical Review Board of
the Medical Faculty of the University
of Göttingen (Göttingen, Germany). After giving informed consent, patients in each patient
group, that is, BC and NHL, were randomly allocated by
sealed-envelope technique to undergo either LVL in which
4.5 ± 15 percent of the total peripheral blood volume was
processed and an NVL in which 2.5 ± 15 percent of the total
peripheral blood volume was processed on the consecutive
day, or vice versa (an NVL followed by an LVL). The main
evaluation criteria of the study were the comparison of the
number of CD34+ cells per harvest and the extraction efficacy
for CD34+ cells in LVL and NVL. Extraction efficacy was
defined as the number of CD34+ cells per leukapheresis –
(the number of CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood before
leukapheresis – the number of CD34+ cells in the peripheral
blood after leukapheresis).
Furthermore, the number of CFU–GM was measured
after cryopreservation for all leukapheresis samples.
Inclusion criteria
Patients <60 years with high-risk BC or NHL were included
in the protocol. Inclusion criteria for patients with BC were
>10 positive lymph nodes, positivity in all examined lymph
nodes at first diagnosis, or local regional relapse within 2
years after first diagnosis and initially positive lymph nodes.
Inclusion criteria for patients with NHL were large-cell lymphoma
with persistent disease after standard chemotherapy
or at relapse or low-grade NHL stage III/IV and
progressive disease. All patients with chemotherapy-sensitive
disease were eligible. Patients’ characteristics are described
in Table 1. Eligibility requirements included mobilization
with chemotherapy and G–CSF (5-10 µg/kg/BW/
day, given subcutaneously). G–CSF was administered 3 to
10 hours before leukapheresis. Exclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria were refractoriness to platelet transfusion,
disorders of blood coagulation, heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia, disease manifestation in the central
nervous system, fever >38.5°C within 48 hours before
leukapheresis, dilatative cardiomyopathy, symptomatic ischemic
heart disease, heart attack within 6 months before
leukapheresis, chronic lung disease with hypoxemia, severe
drug-resistant hypertension, severe nonadjustable diabetes,
epileptic seizures, impairment of renal function with
serum creatinine >2.0 mg per dL, elevation of liver enzymes
>3 times the normal value and/or a bilirubin value >2.0 mg
per dL, clinical symptoms of impaired cerebral blood circulation,
severe psychiatric disease, and previous bone
marrow or PBPC transplantation.
Patients and study population
During the study period, a total of 100 patients underwent
PBPC mobilization and harvest. Of these patients, 58 met
the inclusion criteria regarding diagnosis and mobilization
regimen. Forty-five patients gave informed consent and
were randomly assigned. Of these patients, 4 had to be excluded
from study evaluation. One patient had no
mobilizable PBPCs, 1 patient did not meet the inclusion criteria, and 2 did not undergo a leukapheresis of appropriate
size, because of technical errors (Fig. 1). In 2 of the 41
remaining patients, CD34+ cell counts after leukapheresis
were not performed. Twenty-six patients had BC and 15
patients had NHL. Twenty-two patients with BC were
treated in an adjuvant setting because of high-risk disease;
the other 4 patients were eligible for high-dose chemotherapy
(HDCT) because of high-risk locoregional relapse.
Seven patients of the NHL group had stage IV follicular lymphoma
and were included in an ongoing randomized trial
comparing the effect of HDCT to that of conventional chemotherapy.
One additional patient with follicular lymphoma
presented with relapse after conventional chemotherapy.
Three patients with diffuse large-cell lymphoma
and persistent disease after standard chemotherapy and
two with a chemotherapy-sensitive relapse were included.
One patient had mantle cell lymphoma and one presented
with a malignant lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue.
Mobilization and leukapheresis
All patients underwent mobilization with chemotherapy
and G–CSF. In 18 patients with BC, the mobilization regimen
given consisted of epirubicin at 50 mg per m2,
ifosfamide at 4000 mg per m2, cisplatinum at 50 mg per m²,
and etoposide at 500 mg per m2 . The other 8 patients with
BC underwent mobilization with epirubicin at 90 mg per
m² and cyclophosphamide at 600 mg per m2. In 13 patients
with NHL, mobilization was performed by the administration
of dexamethasone at 3 × 8 mg on Days 1 through 10,
carmustine at 60 mg per m² on Day 2, melphalan at 20 mg
per m2 on Day 3, etoposide at 75 to 150 mg per m2 on Days
4 through 7, and cytarabin at 2 × 100 mg per m² on Days 4
through 7 (DexaBEAM). High-dose cyclophosphamide (4 g/
m²) as single-agent mobilization was given to 2 patients
with NHL.
On the second day after the end of chemotherapy, subcutaneous
administration of G–CSF at a dose of 5 to 10 µg
per kg of BW per day was started and continued until the
last day of leukapheresis. Leukapheresis procedures were
begun when the white cell count exceeded 1 × 109 per L.
Leukapheresis procedures were performed on a cell separator
(Spectra, COBE Laboratories, Heimstetten, Germany)
via a central venous catheter. In NVL procedures, ACD-A
(Fresenius, Bad Homburg, Germany) alone was used as the
anticoagulant. Two patients received heparin during NVL
because of an operator error. In all LVL procedures, 6 International
Units (IU) of heparin (Hoffmann-La Roche,
Grenzach-Wyhlen, Germany) per 1 mL of ACD-A was used
as additional anticoagulant.28 The leukapheresis values are
described in Table 2. The targeted transplantation dose was
a minimum of 1 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW11, and
the same dose was used as a “back-up.”
Laboratory methods
A whole-blood count was performed routinely by use of an
electronic counter (NE 1500, TOA Sysmex, Kobe, Japan)
according to standard methods. Immunophenotyping for
CD34+ cells and the evaluation of colony growth were performed
as previously described. The numbers of CD34+
cells before leukapheresis and in the leukapheresis component
were evaluated in all 82 harvest procedures. In 3
apheresis procedures, the number of CD34+ cells after
leukapheresis was not determined (NVL: n = 1, LVL: n = 2).
Transplantation
Patients with BC received HDCT consisting of mitoxantrone
at 10 mg per m2, cyclophosphamide at 1500 mg per m2, and
thiotepa at 150 mg per m2 on 4 consecutive days, as a conditioning
regimen. Patients with low-grade NHL underwent
conditioning with total body irradiation (12 Gy) and highdose
cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg BW). In patients with
high-grade NHL, carmustine at 300 mg per m2 and
melphalan at 150 mg per m2 on Day 5 before transplantation
and etoposide at 100 mg per m2 and cytarabin at 200
mg per m2 on Days 5 to 2 before transplantation were given.
Beginning on the day of PBPC transfusion, all patients received
G–CSF subcutaneously at a daily dose of 5 µg per kg
of BW until a white cell count above 1000 per µL was determined
on 3 consecutive days. After mobilization and progenitor
cell harvest, two patients with NHL and two with
BC were not eligible for HDCT and PBPC transplantation
because of progressive disease. One patient underwent
transplantation twice, and thus a total of 38 PBPC transplantations
were performed in 37 patients. One patient with
NHL underwent transplantation with autologous bone
marrow and PBPCs, because neither the bone marrow cells
nor the PBPCs were sufficient for transplantation as a single
source of progenitor cells.
In patients undergoing harvest in complete remission,
the bag containing the maximum number of PBPCs and the
smallest volume was chosen for transfusion. In patients with partial remission or initial bone
marrow involvement, PBPCs were
collected again after further cycles of
chemotherapy. Bags of PBPCs harvested
as late as possible during treatment
but still containing a sufficient
number of PBPCs were chosen for
transplant.
Statistics
The study was designed to detect a
difference of 50 percent in the CD34+
cell yield between NVL and LVL. On
the basis of an expected number of 3
× 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW in an
NVL, a difference of 50 percent between NVL and LVL, and
a variance of 3 × 106, we calculated that, for statistical significance
(p<0.05 and 1 – ß = 0.80), at least 41 patients
should be enrolled in the study.
Unless otherwise stated, data values are described as
median and ranges. The data were analyzed by the nonparametric
paired-rank test31 or by the distribution-free
Mann-Whitney test. Calculations were performed with a
software program (Statistical Analysis System, version 6.12,
SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Results were considered to be significantly
different when the p value was below 0.05.
RESULTS
Yield of CD34+ cells and extraction efficacy
The median number of CD34+ cells was significantly higher
in LVL than in NVL (Table 3 and Fig. 2). In five patients with
BC and seven with NHL, the NVL component contained
more CD34+ cells than did the LVL component. In all but
three of these patients, the NVL was scheduled on Day 2.
In addition, the number of CD34+ cells per µL of peripheral
blood before leukapheresis was significantly higher in
these 12 patients (p<0.01) before NVL than before LVL. With
all 82 procedures considered, the median number of CD34+
cells per µL of peripheral blood was not different before
NVL and LVL (57/µL and 50/µL, respectively, p = 0.38).
There was a significant decrease in CD34+ cells per µL of
peripheral blood after both NVL and LVL (p = 0.01 and p =
0.009, respectively), but the median postapheresis values
did not differ between NVL and LVL (35 vs. 29 CD34+ cells/
µL, p = 0.09). We determined the difference(s) between the
preapheresis/postapheresis values for CD34+ cells per kg
of BW in NVL and LVL; the values were similar. But the median
extraction efficacy was significantly higher (p<0.0001)
for LVL than for NVL (Table 3). In relation to BW, the median
values were 3.5 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW for LVL
and 1.1 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW for NVL (p<0.0001).
As this value was greater than zero for both procedures, NVL
as well as LVL seems to lead to a recruitment of PBPCs.
Influence of diagnosis on the yield of CD34+ cells
In the 26 patients with BC, the median amount of CD34+
cells per kg of BW was significantly higher (p<0.0001) in LVL
than in NVL, whereas in the 15 patients with NHL, there was
no significant difference for the two procedures (Table 3).
The median number of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral
blood before leukapheresis did not differ for either group
of patients or either procedure. But patients with BC had
significantly higher (p = 0.012 and p = 0.028, respectively)
median numbers of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral blood
before leukapheresis than patients with NHL had (LVL: 61
vs. 24; NVL: 64 vs. 23). Moreover, in patients with BC, the
median extraction efficacy was significantly higher
(p<0.0001) for LVL than for NVL, whereas, in patients with
NHL, there was no difference (p = 0.24) between the two
procedures (see Table 3).
Number of CFU–GM after cryopreservation
The median number of CFU–GM per kg of BW in each
sample of cryopreserved leukapheresis component was
higher (p = 0.0026) for LVL than for NVL (3.1 × 105 and 2.4 ×
105, respectively). Considering this value for the two patient
groups separately, in patients with BC, the median number
of CFU–GM per kg of BW after cryopreservation was significantly
higher in the patients undergoing LVL than in those
undergoing NVL (3.5 vs. 2.4 × 105, p = 0.0047), whereas in
the patients with NHL there was no difference between LVL
and NVL (2.7 and 2.1 × 105, p = 0.35).
Transplantation
With Day 1 and Day 2 leukapheresis procedures taken together,
one transplantation dose and a back-up dose were
collected in all patients with BC, but in only 11 of the 15
patients with NHL (p = 0.026, chi-square test with Yates’s
correction). In 36 patients, 37 transplantations with PBPCs
alone were performed. One patient with BC underwent
transplantation twice. One other patient received both autologous
bone marrow and autologous PBPCs. In PBPC
transplantation, patients received a median of 2.7 × 106
CD34+ cells per kg of BW (range, 1.0-7.8 × 106) and a median
of 2.0 × 105 CFU–GM per kg of BW after cryopreservation
(range, 0.7-10.4 × 105). One patient with BC died on Day 34
after transplantation, because of respiratory failure due to
fungal pneumonia with Candida albicans. After a median
of 10 days (range, 9-16), all other patients had a WBC count
>1,000 per µL in peripheral blood. A platelet count >20,000
per µL without transfusion support was reached after a
median of 12 days (8-70) after transplant.
Twenty-five transplantations were performed in 24 patients
with grafts from study leukapheresis procedures
alone. In 23 transplantations, the graft of one leukapheresis
component was sufficient in PBPC content. Seventeen patients,
14 with BC and 3 with NHL, received a graft from an
LVL. Only 1 of these patients with BC needed a total harvest;
the other 16 received only one-half of the leukapheresis
component. Of the 6 patients being given grafts from an
NVL, only 3 with BC had sufficient numbers of PBPCs in
one-half of the collection; the others, 2 with BC and 1 with
NHL, received a total harvest. Two patients with NHL received
the LVL and the NVL graft.
DISCUSSION
We analyzed in a prospective controlled study the efficacy
of LVL in 41 patients with BC or NHL. When all procedures
were considered, the median number of CD34+ cells and
the median extraction efficacy were significantly higher in
LVL than in NVL. In both LVL and NVL, the median extraction
efficacy was greater than zero, which suggests that
additional PBPCs must have been recruited into the peripheral
blood during leukapheresis, as also reported by others.
 The number of “recruited” CD34+ cells per kg of BW
is in the magnitude of 1 (NVL) to 3.5 (LVL) times that in a
transplantation dose. Our observation that the extraction
efficacy of LVL differed in patients with BC and those with
NHL may help to explain conflicting data in the literature.
In children, the processing of more blood volumes does not
necessarily lead to increased recruitment of PBPCs. Factors
such as the percentage of CD34+ cells in bone marrow
before mobilization therapy may have an influence on the
extraction efficacy during leukapheresis. The phenomenon
of hematopoietic progenitor cell mobilization is poorly
understood. Stem and progenitor cells are released from the
bone marrow into the peripheral blood, where they can be
harvested by leukapheresis. Upon return, these mobilized
progenitor cells migrate into the bone marrow and reconstitute
hematopoiesis. At least from a kinetic point of view,
a transient, rapid increase, such as that after physical exercise
or the administration of adrenocorticotropic hormone,
endotoxin, dextran sulfate, or antibodies against
the cell adhesion molecule VLA-4, can be distinguished
from a delayed, sustained increase that can be observed, for
example, after the administration of G–CSF.
These observations and the data obtained in our study
could be explained by a dynamic equilibrium of progenitor
cells in peripheral blood and bone marrow, caused by
continuous mobilization and homing of PBPCs. Preliminary
data (Humpe A, manuscript in preparation) suggest that the
decrease in CD34+ cell numbers in peripheral blood during
leukapheresis and the increase in the numbers in the
collection bag can be well described by a cell-kinetic model
consisting of the three distributional compartments: bone
marrow, peripheral blood, and extracorporeal volume. With
the help of such a model, a better prediction of the yield of
CD34+ cells on the basis of values such as number of CD34+
cells, total peripheral blood volume, flow rate, and duration
of leukapheresis may be possible in the future.
During LVL, patients received significant amounts of
heparin. In vitro experiments were able to show that homing
and transmigration of PBPCs are also dependent on
PECAM-1 (CD31), a heparin-binding adhesion molecule.
35,36 Thus, it may be that heparin interacts with the
microenvironment of PBPCs. The interaction of PECAM-1
with glycosaminoglycans may be influenced by the administration
of heparin during leukapheresis, leading to increased
PBPC numbers in the peripheral blood. In addition,
the influence of previous chemotherapy on the expression
of such molecules and the interaction with heparin has not
yet been determined.
The difference in extraction efficacy between the BC
and NHL patient groups could be an explanation for the different
correlation coefficients between preapheresis numbers
of CD34+ cells per µL in peripheral blood and the
CD34+ cell yield in the harvest. The leukapheresis size,
the obviously varied extent of recruitment of PBPCs during
the harvest, and the different extraction efficacies may influence
the relationship between preleukapheresis numbers
of CD34+ cells and the yield in the PBPC harvest.
Nevertheless, some data showed that sufficient
amounts of PBPCs for transplantation can be harvested by
a single LVL in most pediatric patients after mobilization
with G–CSF alone39 and in adult patients with NHL,
Hodgkin’s disease, or acute lymphoblastic leukemia after
mobilization with chemotherapy and G–CSF. In our study,
14.6 percent and 24.4 percent of the patients failed to
achieve 1 and 2 × 106, respectively, CD34+ cells per kg of BW
with an LVL. These figures were lower when only the patients
with BC were considered. With both leukapheresis
procedures taken together, none of the patients with BC
failed to achieve 2 × 106 CD34+ cells per kg of BW, but, in
the NHL group, 26.7 percent of the patients still did not
achieve a transplantation dose and a back-up dose. An explanation
might be the different mobilization regimens and
the differences in previous chemotherapy between our
study patients and the reported data. Recently published
data18 showed that prior exposure to chemotherapy, especially
to DexaBEAM, or prior radiotherapy has a significant
influence on the yield of PBPCs.
Apart from the harvest of a transplantation dose and
an additional dose as back-up, the aim of a leukapheresis
could be to harvest maximum numbers of CD34+ cells.
Recent data15 suggest that hematopoietic toxicity, platelet
transfusion support, and quality of life may be positively influenced
by the return of more than 15 × 106 CD34+ cells per
kg of BW after HDCT. 
Our data suggest that patients with BC and with high
numbers of CD34+ cells in the peripheral blood before
leukapheresis obviously profit from a substantial recruitment
of PBPCs during an LVL, whereas other patients do
not. It would be highly desirable to identify the latter patients
before leukapheresis.