The preferred treatment of women with early-stage cervical cancer FIGO IA2IIA is radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. The overall prognosis for patients undergoing radical hysterectomy is good with reported 5-year survival rates ranging from 75 to 90. However among patients with a clinically early cancer there are prognostic features which identify patients at increased risk for recurrence recurrent cervical cancer after initial radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy has a poor prognosis with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5 or less. A retrospective study of patients undergoing radical hysterectomy at Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center MSKCC from 1939 to 1977 identified the following risk factors: metastatic tumor to the pelvic lymph nodes large cervical tumor parametrial extension of disease nonsquamous or grade 3 histology and deep .75 cervical stromal invasion. There have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients at risk for recurrence who received adjuvant therapy compared to those patients not receiving adjuvant therapy. In an effort to determine whether the improved survival in the Memorial Hospital Phase II trial was due to the combination of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy or due to the effect of the chemotherapy alone a multicenter randomized Phase III clinical trial was designed. Following recovery from the second cycle of chemotherapy patients received a course of whole pelvic radiation therapy to a dose of 45 Gy delivered in 20 fractions via a four-field technique patients did not receive intravaginal therapy. In the second arm of the study patients were randomized to treatment with a similar regimen of chemotherapy as described above without pelvic radiation following the first two cycles of cisplatin and bleomycin the patient then received the third and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week intervals. Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors 33 of these patients and the remaining 14 patients had a Stage IIA cancer. Forty-five patients were randomized to the chemotherapy withdrawn by the institutional principal investigator due to plus radiation therapy treatment arm and 44 patients received poor medical condition of the patient n 1. Among patients with 3 or more risk factors there was also no differ-The debate regarding the role of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free survival or overall survival when tients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy compared to patients with 12 risk factors Fig. 3. Killackey et al. reported no recurrences among 22 patients with cervical cancer at high risk after radical hysterectomy utilizing a similar treatment regimen consisting of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy. Tattersall et al. were unable to demonstrate a difference in disease-free or overall survival in 71 patients randomized to either pelvic radiation versus chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation after radical hysterectomy for Stage IBIIA cervical cancer. The risk factors did not appear to be additive since the disease-free and overall survival were similar when patients with 12 risk factors were compared to those patients with 3 or more risk factors. Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all patients. 