   There have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients at risk for recurrence who received adjuvant therapy compared to those patients not receiving adjuvant therapy. Patients with clinical Stage IBÿ¿¿¿¿¿IIA cancer of the uterine cervix treated by radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph node sampling were eligible for entry into this prospective study if they had one or more of the following risk factors: (1) metastatic disease to pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than or equal to 4 cm in diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 75% or greater stromal invasion, (4) nonsquamous histology, and/or (5) occult parametrial involvement or positive surgical margins.   Forty-five patients were randomized to the chemotherapy withdrawn by the institutional principal investigator due to plus radiation therapy treatment arm and 44 patients received poor medical condition of the patient (n ÿ¿¿¿¿¿ 1). tions, including 7 patients who were randomized (6 to che-one patient, randomized to chemotherapy, withdrew after chemotherapy plus radiation therapy and 1 patient to chemother-experiencing an allergic bleomycin reaction during the initial chemotherapy alone) and then either refused treatment (n ÿ¿¿¿¿¿6) or were infusion of bleomycin during cycle 1.  tion therapy (n ÿ¿¿¿¿¿3) or had a major violation in the radiation Thus, there were 33 patients who received the combination therapy treatment plan when intravaginal radiation therapy of chemotherapy and pelvic radiation and 39 who received was administered, and she did not receive the last 2 cycles chemotherapy alone who could be evaluated for disease-of cisplatin (n ÿ¿¿¿¿¿1). Among patients with 3 or more risk factors, there was also no differ-The debate regarding the role of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free survival or overall survival when tients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy compared to patients with 1ÿ¿¿¿¿¿2 risk factors (Fig. Major toxicity suggest that a 65% 5-year survival rate after therapy combinincluded one patient who did not receive the second cycle ing radical hysterectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and of bleomycin due to the onset of pulmonary symptoms and postoperative pelvic radiotherapy for patients with pelvic a significant decrease in pulmonary function compared to a lymph node metastases is an improvement compared to his-pretreatment study. reported no recurrences among 22 patients with cervical cancer at high risk after radical hysterectomy utilizing a similar treatment regimen consisting of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy. were unable to demonstrate a difference in disease-free or overall survival in 71 patients randomized to either pelvic radiation versus chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation after radical hysterectomy for Stage IBÿ¿¿¿¿¿IIA cervical cancer. The risk factors did not appear to be additive, since the disease-free and overall survival were similar when patients with 1ÿ¿¿¿¿¿2 risk factors were compared to those patients with 3 or more risk factors. Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all patients.
