However, among patients with a clinically early cancer, there are prognostic features which identify patients at increased risk for recurrence; recurrent cervical cancer after initial radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy has a poor prognosis, with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5% or less. Few reports have utilized adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy alone after radical surgery for invasive cervical cancer. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 


Patients with clinical Stage IBñIIA cancer of the uterine cervix treated by radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph node sampling were eligible for entry into this prospective study if they had one or more of the following risk factors: (1) metastatic disease to pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than or equal to 4 cm in diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 75% or greater stromal invasion, (4) nonsquamous histology, and/or (5) occult parametrial involvement or positive surgical margins. Following recovery from the second cycle of chemotherapy, patients received a course of whole pelvic radiation therapy to a dose of 45 Gy, delivered in 20 fractions via a four-field technique; patients did not receive intravaginal therapy. At the completion of treatment, patients were followed according to the individual surgeonsí preference. 


The initial accrual goal of the trial was 160 patients, with 80 patients randomized to each of the two treatment arms. 


RESULTS 


Between 1987 and 1994, a total of 89 patients were entered into the trial; 45 patients were entered at MSKCC, 24 from the Mayo Clinic, and 10 each from the Uniform Services Health undergone a radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphade-Center and the University of Miami. Twenty-five patients had 3 or more high70 years. Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors; 33 of these patients and the remaining 14 patients had a Stage IIA cancer. 


Forty-five patients were randomized to the chemotherapy withdrawn by the institutional principal investigator due to plus radiation therapy treatment arm and 44 patients received poor medical condition of the patient (n Å 1). 2); 10 patients in of pelvic radiation therapy. the chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy arm have experienced recurrences compared to 9 recurrences in the 


DISCUSSION 

group of patients treated with chemotherapy alone. One patient had the fourth cycle of cis-torical controls. reported no recurrences among 22 patients with cervical cancer at high risk after radical hysterectomy utilizing a similar treatment regimen consisting of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy. were unable to demonstrate a difference in disease-free or overall survival in 71 patients randomized to either pelvic radiation versus chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation after radical hysterectomy for Stage IBñIIA cervical cancer. Additionally, if the patient does experience a local or regional recurrence after chemotherapy, pelvic radiation therapy still has curative potential. Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all patients.

