

We conducted a prospective, randomised study to compare external and internal radiotherapy with
radical hysterectomy and node dissection. Our main aim was to evaluate 5-year survival and the rate
and pattern of complications and recurrences associated with each procedure.


All patients received standard pretreatment evaluation, which included complete blood analysis,
intravenous pyelogram, lymphangiography, cystoscopy, chest radiography, and other tests when
indicated. 


We used the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) clinical staging system to
classify the stage of cancer.7 If there was disagreement about the stage, the case was assigned to
the earlier stage. 468 patients had FIGO stage Ib or IIa disease. 343 of these patients were
enrolled after they had given their informed consent to take part. 


Radiotherapy included, external pelvic irradiation with 18 MV photon beam by the multiportal
technique, one dose of 1820Gy at the isocentre, and two or more portals treated daily. The median
total dose of radiation was 47 (range 4053) Gy during 35 weeks, depending on the tumour volume and
nodal status. When lymphangiography showed common iliac or paraortic metastases, paraortic lymph
nodes were treated with a dose of 45 Gy over 5 weeks and two shaped opposed fields (AP-PA). 


The pathologist provided us with histological subtypes, grade, depth of invasion, tumour size,
presence of capillary-like-space involvement, paracervical-tissue involvement, and number, site, and
type of lymph-node metastases. 


We used multivariate Cox regression analysis to assess the effect of cervical size, age, FIGO state,
histological type, grade of differentiation, radiological lymph-node status, and treatment group on
overall survival. 


Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer, 125 were excluded because of age (<30
years, >70 years, n=43), medical illness (n=54), previous or concurrent malignant disease (n=21), or
the referring physicians or patients preference for surgery, radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy
(n=7). 


Adjuvant radiotherapy was done in 62 (54%) of the 114 surgery-group patients who had a cervical
diameter of 4 cm or smaller and in 46 (84%) of 55 surgery-group patients who had a cervical diameter
larger than 4 cm. 19 patients whose cervical diameter was 4 cm or less and three patients whose
cervical diameter was greater than 4 cm had lymph-vascular-space involvement as the only
pathological risk factor, these patients did not receive postoperative irradiation.


For rates of adenocarcinoma there was a significant advantage for patients who had surgery compared
with those who had radiotherapy in both overall survival (70% vs 59%, p=005) and disease-free
survival (66% vs 47%, p=002). Overall survival for the 108 surgery-group patients who received
adjuvant treatment (high-risk group) compared with the patients with surgery alone (low-risk group)
or radiotherapy alone (unknown risk) is shown in figure 4,


Two deaths were related to the primary treatment, both in the surgery group, ileal spontaneous
perforation (11 months after adjuvant radiotherapy) and pulmonary embolism (17 days after surgery). 
Three (17%) surgery-group patients had perioperative complications, one vascular lesion during
lymphadenectomy, one postoperative ureterovaginal fistula, and one fatal pulmonary embolism. Other
vesical complications (severe actinic cystitis, stress incontinence, high-pressure bladder) were
recorded in two (3%) patients after surgery, 11 (10%) after surgery plus radiotherapy, and in eight
(5%) after radiotherapy alone. 


Morley and Seskis study, of 446 patients with stage-Ib disease recruited between 1945 and 1975 and
treated with radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy or external irradiation and
brachyradiotherapy, reported crude 5-year survival of 87% and 83%, respectively. 


In our study, 5-year actuarial survival was the same in the surgery and radiation groups (83%),
which suggests that there is no treatment of choice with respect to local control of disease. 
Surgery also offers other advantages, pelvic relapses can be successfully cured by radiotherapy,
whereas salvage surgery after primary irradiation carries a high rate of failures and severe
morbidity. 


Morbidity is associated with both treatment strategies, though the most severe complications, such
as operative mortality, urological complications, and tissue damage from irradiation, have been
reduced during the past 20 years. In our experience, the combination of surgery and adjuvant
radiotherapy carries the worst morbidity, especially long-term (delayed in onset) complications,
that are difficult to record during the follow-up. 


Women whose cervical diameters are larger than 4 cm should be identified before surgery so that they
can benefit from tailored treatment, radical radiotherapy, with the option of concomitant
radiosensitising chemotherapy to improve the local control of the disease, or cisplatinbased
chemotherapy followed by radical surgery. 
