Intestinal anastomosis has been successfully performed for more than 150 years using a variety of techniques materials and devices. Of these the method that has proven successful in most situations and in the hands of most surgeons has been the two-layer anastomosis using interrupted silk sutures for an outer inverted seromuscular layer and a running absorbable suture for a transmural inner layer. The only appreciable shortcoming of the two-layer technique is that it is somewhat tedious and time-consuming to perform. Recently several reports have appeared advocating a single-layer continuous anastomosis using monofilament plastic suture. This anastomosis requires less time to fashion costs less than any other method and may have a lower risk of leakage. Because of these potential advantages we hypothesized that the single-layer technique could be introduced into our surgical teaching program with no increase in anastomotic failure and that it could be performed in less time than the two-layer technique. Patients requiring anastomosis to the rectum or third or fourth portion of the duodenum were excluded because the single-layer continuous method is awkward when both ends of the bowel cannot be fully mobilized.  Patients were assigned to either the one-or two-layer technique in a prospective randomized fashion.  All two-layer anastomoses were constructed using interrupted 3.0 silk Lembert sutures for the outer layer and a running 3.0 polyglycolic acid suture for the transmural inner layer.  All single-layer anastomoses were constructed using a continuous 3.0 polypropylene double-needle suture that began at the mesenteric border Fig. 1. For two-layer anastomoses three packets of 3.0 silk sutures each containing five needled sutures and two packets of 3.0 polyglycolic acid sutures were used. For single-layer anastomoses one package of double-needled 3.0 polypropylene suture was used. Fifty-nine patients were randomized to single-layer anastomoses and 66 to two-layer anastomoses. This resulted in 65 single-layer continuous and 67 two-layer interrupted anastomoses. The two-layer interrupted anastomosis has its origins in the early 19th century through the experimental work of Travers and of Lembert who advocated careful approximation of the serosal surfaces of the bowel and devised a method of suturing to accomplish this. The present study demonstrates that a single-layer continuous anastomosis is similar in terms of safety to the two-layer technique but that it can be constructed in a significantly shorter time and at a lower cost. Numerous studies in the literature comparing techniques e.g. one-layer vs. two-layer hand-sewn vs. stapled and end-to-end vs. end-to-side have failed to demonstrate a clear superiority of one over another. However our study design did not include the time required to prepare the bowel for anastomosis which is considerably less for the one-layer technique. We conclude that the single-layer continuous anastomosis requires less time to construct and has a similar risk of leakage compared with the two-layer technique. For these reasons we believe the single-layer continuous anastomosis is superior to the two-layer interrupted technique. 
