Introduction
Stage Ib and IIa carcinoma of the cervix can be cured by
radical surgery or radiotherapy with similar effectiveness,
but the rate and types of complications differ.
Radiotherapy is feasible and effective in almost all
patients; 5-year survival after this therapy ranges from
78% to 91%.1,2 By contrast, radical surgery affords the
opportunity to study pathological findings, so that groups
of at-risk patients who could benefit from adjuvant
treatment can be identified. The 5-year cure rate after
surgery for early-stage cervical tumours ranges from 54%
to 90%; in most cases this rate is achieved with adjuvant
therapy.3,4 The treatment of choice will depend on the
policy of the institution, the gynaecologist or radiation
oncologist involved, and the age and the general health of
the patient.
Apart from Newton’s study5 about stage-I diseases,
there have been no randomised studies to compare
radiotherapy with radical surgery in one institution over a
short period of time. We conducted a prospective,
randomised study to compare external and internal
radiotherapy with radical hysterectomy and node
dissection. Our main aim was to evaluate 5-year survival
and the rate and pattern of complications and recurrences
associated with each procedure.
Methods
Between September, 1986, and December, 1991, 578 patients
with primary invasive cervical cancer were referred to the
Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Radiation
Oncology, at the Istituto di Scienze Biomediche S Gerardo,
University of Milan, Monza. All patients received standard
pretreatment evaluation, which included complete blood
analysis, intravenous pyelogram, lymphangiography, cystoscopy,
chest radiography, and other tests when indicated. The cervical
diameter was assessed by alginate mould.6
We used the International Federation of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO) clinical staging system to classify the stage of
cancer.7 If there was disagreement about the stage, the case was
assigned to the earlier stage. 468 patients had FIGO stage Ib or
IIa disease. 343 of these patients were enrolled after they had
given their informed consent to take part. Eligibility criteria
were: age 30–70 years; newly diagnosed stage Ib or IIa cervical
cancer; no concurrent or previous malignant disease; WHO
performance status of 1 or less; and feasibility of both radical
surgery and radiotherapy.
The clinical evaluation of the patients was done by the
gynaecological surgeon together with the radiation oncologist to
avoid bias in the randomisation; in fact, patients with
unfavourable clinical characteristics are usually treated by
radiotherapy alone.
The patients were randomly assigned radical surgery (n=172)
or radical radiotherapy (n=171). Patients were also stratified by
cervical diameter (4 cm or >4 cm). Treatment was assigned by
block randomisation (clusters of ten cases of each stratum of
cervical diameter) from a computer-generated table that had
been created before the start of the study. The treatments in the
table were coded so that no-one could discover treatment
allocation before randomisation. The codes were revealed after
we had obtained the patient’s informed consent.
Radiotherapy included: external pelvic irradiation with 18 MV
photon beam by the multiportal technique; one dose of 1·8–2·0
Gy at the isocentre; and two or more portals treated daily. The
median total dose of radiation was 47 (range 40–53) Gy during
3–5 weeks, depending on the tumour volume and nodal status.
After 2 weeks, one caesium-137 LDR insertion was carried out.
A complete computerised plane was made, according to the
International Commission on Radiation Units and
Measurements report no 38.8 The total dose at point A (external
beam plus brachyradiotherapy) ranged from 70 Gy to 90 Gy
(median 76 Gy). The total dose to the pelvic wall exceeded 50
Gy; an additional dose was administered to the parametria by
external beam if necessary. When lymphangiography showed
common iliac or paraortic metastases, paraortic lymph nodes
were treated with a dose of 45 Gy over 5 weeks
and two shaped opposed fields (AP-PA). A boost of 5–10 Gy
was given to the positive nodes.
Radical surgery consisted of a class III radical abdominal
hysterectomy, as described by Piver and co-workers.9 In all cases,
a lower midline incision was made, which skirted the umbilicus
and extended to the cephalad when indicated. Dissection of the
pelvic lymph node consisted of removal of all fatty lymph-node
bearing tissue anterior, lateral, and posterior to the common,
external, and internal iliac vessels, and anterior to the obturator
nerve. In cases of enlarged paraortic nodes, only sampling or
selective procedures were done. In patients aged 40 years or
younger with squamous histology, one ovary was preserved and
suspended to the ipsilateral paracolic space outside the pelvis.
The pathologist provided us with histological subtypes, grade,
depth of invasion, tumour size, presence of capillary-like-space
involvement, paracervical-tissue involvement, and number, site,
and type of lymph-node metastases.
Patients who had at least one of the following pathological risk
factors received adjuvant radiotherapy: surgical stage greater
than pT2a; less than 3 mm of uninvolved cervical stroma; cutthrough;
and lymph-node metastases. Adjuvant radiotherapy
consisted of external pelvic irradiation (18 MV X-rays) with the
multiportal technique, one fraction of 1·8–2·0 Gy daily, with a
total dose of 50·4 Gy over 5–6 weeks. The paraortic region was
irradiated in case of metastases in the surgical specimen in
common iliac or paraortic nodes with a dose of 45 Gy over 5
weeks.
The primary outcome measures were 5-year overall survival
and the rate of complications. The secondary outcome measure
was recurrence of the disease.
We classified complications as: grade 1, mild symptoms not
affecting the patient’s health and easily cured; grade 2,
symptoms that can be resolved by long-term medical therapies;
grade 3, major symptoms that require surgery or invasive
procedures and affect the performance status of the patient, or
fatal complications.
Statistical analysis
The minimum detectable difference in survival and morbidity
was defined as 15% for =0·05 and 1-=80%. No interim
analysis was done. We used 2 test with Yates’ continuity
correction to test the association between discrete variables. We
compared quantitative data by one-way analysis of variance.
Survival curves were calculated by the life-table method and
compared by the log-rank test. A significance level of 95% was
chosen. Survival and relapses were analysed by intention to treat.
We analysed the rate of complications by the actual treatment
delivered to each patient so that we could assess accurately the
type and cause of morbidity associated with each treatment. We
used multivariate Cox regression analysis to assess the effect of
cervical size, age, FIGO state, histological type, grade of
differentiation, radiological lymph-node status, and treatment
group on overall survival.
Results
The trial profile shows the flow of patients in the study
(figure 1). Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIa
cervical cancer, 125 were excluded because of age (<30
years, >70 years; n=43), medical illness (n=54), previous
or concurrent malignant disease (n=21), or the referring
physician’s or patient’s preference for surgery,
radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy (n=7).
Thus, 343 patients were randomised: 172 to radical
surgery and 171 to radiotherapy. After randomisation,
there were six protocol violations: two in the surgery
group (one progression before operation and one refusal
of any therapy after randomisation) and four in the
radiotherapy group (two patients whose cancer was
incorrectly staged and two with synchronous neoplasia).
We excluded these cases from the analysis. Therefore 170
patients in the surgery group and 167 in the radiotherapy
group were included in the intention-to-treat analysis.
Ten patients crossed over treatment: one refused surgery
and was irradiated, and nine refused radiotherapy and
underwent surgery. These cases were analysed according
to the original group they were allocated to (intention to
treat). Five patients in the radiotherapy group did not
receive brachyradiotherapy after external irradiation
because of unfavourable anatomy and subsequently
underwent radical surgery. Thus, 169 in
the surgery group and 158 in the radiotherapy group
underwent the scheduled treatment (compliance of 98%
for surgery and 92% for radiotherapy).
There were no significant between-group differences in
the distribution of factors affecting prognosis (table 1).
The mean age of patients in the radiotherapy group was
slightly greater than that of patients in the surgery group.
Lymphangiography revealed positive nodes in 24 (14%)
surgery-group patients and in 22 (13%) radiotherapygroup
patients. Six of the 24 surgery-group patients
showed no lymph-node metastasis in the surgical
specimen. Of the 145 surgery-group patients with
negative lymphangiography, 27 had nodal metastases,
which accounted for a specificity of 95% and a sensitivity
of 40%.
The distribution of pathological risk factors differed
significantly according to cervical diameter, especially for
surgical stage, cut-through, and lymph-vascular-space
involvement (table 2). Adjuvant radiotherapy was done in
62 (54%) of the 114 surgery-group patients who had a
cervical diameter of 4 cm or smaller and in 46 (84%) of
55 surgery-group patients who had a cervical diameter
larger than 4 cm. 19 patients whose cervical diameter was
4 cm or less and three patients whose cervical diameter
was greater than 4 cm had lymph-vascular-space
involvement as the only pathological risk factor; these
patients did not receive postoperative irradiation.
Survival and recurrence
Median follow-up was 87 (range 57–120) months. No
patient was lost to follow-up. 11 patients died of
intercurrent disease and two from fatal complications
(bowel perforation and pulmonary embolism). The
overall crude survival for all patients included in the
intention-to-treat analysis was 76·5% (258 of 337). The
status of the patients according to primary therapy and
cervical diameter is shown in table 3.
The overall and disease-free actuarial 5-year survival for
all patients were 83% and 74%, respectively, and did not
differ significantly between the groups (figure 2).
5-year actuarial survival stratified by cervical diameter
was similar in the surgery and radiotherapy groups
(diameter 4 cm: 87% vs 90%; diameter >4 cm: 70% vs
72%; figure 3, table 3). 5-year actuarial disease-free
survival for the surgery and radiotherapy groups was 80%
and 82%, respectively, for patients whose cervical
diameter was 4 cm or smaller, and 63% and 57% for
those with a diameter larger than 4 cm; the betweengroup
differences were not significant. The two groups
did not differ significantly as regards squamous histotype:
overall 5-year survival rates were 84% in surgery-group
patients and 88% in radiotherapy-group patients; overall
disease-free survival was 76% and 78%, respectively. For
rates of adenocarcinoma there was a significant advantage
for patients who had surgery compared with those who
had radiotherapy in both overall survival (70% vs 59%,
p=0·05) and disease-free survival (66% vs 47%, p=0·02).
Results of univariate and multivariate analysis are
shown in table 4. Significant factors in both univariate
and multivariate analyses were cervical diameter, positive
lymphangiography, and adenocarcinomatous histotype.
Overall survival for the 108 surgery-group patients who
received adjuvant treatment (high-risk group) compared
with the patients with surgery alone (low-risk group) or
radiotherapy alone (unknown risk) is shown in figure 4,
Overall, 86 (25·5%) patients developed recurrent
disease: 42 (25%) in the surgery group and 44 (26%) in
the radiotherapy group. Of these 86 patients, 60 (70%)
died of disease. Six patients were still alive with disease
4–18 months after the diagnosis of relapse. Three patients
with recurrence died of intercurrent disease (one after
successful treatment of the recurrence). Among the
patients who developed recurrent disease, six (14%) in
the surgery group and 13 (30%) in the radiotherapy
group were cured; this difference was not significant
(p=0·15). The median time to recurrence did not differ
significantly between the surgery and radiotherapy groups
(20 vs 18 months, p=0·24).
82% of pelvic recurrences and 61% of the distant ones
became evident within 2 years of the primary treatment.
Of the 86 patients who developed a recurrence, 50 (58%)
had local or pelvic recurrence (22 [52%] in the surgery
group vs 28 [64%] in the radiotherapy group, p=0·42),
and 36 (42%) had distant metastases (20 [48%] vs 16
[36%], p=0·62); five of these 36 patients also had a pelvic
recurrence. However, when cervical diameter was taken
into account, there were substantial between-group
differences in pelvic recurrence. In particular, among
radiotherapy-group patients with cervical diameter larger
than 4 cm, the rate of pelvic relapse was more than twofold
the rate of distant relapses (30% vs 13%). In
addition, among women with a cervical diameter larger
than 4 cm, there was a significantly higher rate of pelvic
relapse among those who had radiotherapy than among
those who had surgery plus adjuvant irradiation (16
[70%] vs 9 [53%], p=0·46).
Complications
Patients who had a treatment crossover were excluded
from the analysis because the same factors that induced
the treatment crossover could have affected the
subsequent morbidity. Thus, 169 patients in the surgery
group and 158 in the radiotherapy group were included
in this analysis. Complications were classified according
to the glossary of Chassagne and colleagues.10 In the
surgery group, 48 (28%) patients showed severe (grade
2–3) morbidity that required medical or surgical
treatment, compared with 19 (12%) patients in the
radiotherapy group, (p=0·0004; table 3). Grade 2 or 3
complications affected 19 (31%) patients who had
surgery alone and 29 (27%) patients who received
surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy (p=0·71). The sum of
the short-term and long-term complications exceeds the
total number of complications because some of the
patients had multiple morbidity.
Two deaths were related to the primary treatment,
both in the surgery group: ileal spontaneous perforation
(11 months after adjuvant radiotherapy) and pulmonary
embolism (17 days after surgery). This accounts for an
overall mortality rate of 0·6%. Three (1·7%) surgery-group patients had perioperative complications: one
vascular lesion during lymphadenectomy, one
postoperative ureterovaginal fistula, and one fatal
pulmonary embolism.
Hydroureteronephrosis was recorded in: two (3%) of
61 patients who had surgery alone; 11 (10%) of 108
patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy; and eight
(5%) of 158 patients who had radiotherapy alone
(p=0·1). The relative risk of this complication for surgery
plus radiotherapy versus surgery alone was 3·11 (95% CI
0·71–13·56) and was 2·01 (95% CI 0·84–4·8%) for
surgery plus radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone.
Positioning of ureteral catheter or nephtostomy was
needed, respectively, in two (100%), three (27%), and
five (62%) patients with hydroureteronephrosis in the
three above-mentioned groups.
Chronic neurological bladder was observed in eight
(13%) patients who had surgery alone and in five (5%)
patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy. Other vesical
complications (severe actinic cystitis, stress incontinence,
high-pressure bladder) were recorded in two (3%)
patients after surgery, 11 (10%) after surgery plus
radiotherapy, and in eight (5%) after radiotherapy alone.
Ileal obstruction occurred in six (5%) patients who
underwent surgery plus radiotherapy and in two (1%)
who received radical radiotherapy. In the radiotherapy
group, one patient had intestinal perforation, one
rectovaginal fistula, and 12 severe proctites.
Severe oedema of the legs occurred in ten (9%)
patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy, in one
(0·6%) patient who had radiotherapy alone, and in none
of the patients who had surgery alone. Pelvic lymphocyst
occurred in five (8%) patients after surgery and in five
(15%) after surgery plus radiotherapy. Abdominal hernia
occurred in seven patients, of whom four received surgery
alone and three received surgery plus radiotherapy.
Discussion
Our review of the published research suggests that cure
rates are similar for patients with stage-I cervical cancers
who undergo surgery or radiotherapy. Newton5 reported
that the 5-year survival rate for 119 patients with stage-I
disease accrued over 10 years in a partly randomised
study was 81% for radical surgery and 74% for
radiotherapy; this difference was not significant. Morley
and Seski’s11 study, of 446 patients with stage-Ib disease
recruited between 1945 and 1975 and treated with radical
hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy or
external irradiation and brachyradiotherapy, reported
crude 5-year survival of 87% and 83%, respectively.
These rates suggest that both treatments are equally
effective for early-stage cancers (Ib and IIa).
In our study, 5-year actuarial survival was the same in
the surgery and radiation groups (83%), which suggests
that there is no treatment of choice with respect to local
control of disease. Apart from survival, optimum
treatment strategies depend on the benefits and
disadvantages of each treatment and on prognostic factors
(cervical diameter, histotype, and lymph-node status).
Age is also an important factor; in most cases, cervical
carcinomas occur in middle-aged women. Radical
hysterectomy allows the gonadal function of at least one
ovary to be saved, thereby avoiding the effects of early
menopause in younger women. Shortening and fibrosis of
the vagina can be limited if the woman is sexually active.
Most complications can be easily corrected. Surgery also
offers other advantages: pelvic relapses can be successfully
cured by radiotherapy, whereas salvage surgery after
primary irradiation carries a high rate of failures and
severe morbidity. Furthermore, surgery allows the status
of the lymph nodes, the most dependent variable
associated with survival, to be assessed accurately.
By contrast, radiotherapy is easier to deliver for patients
who are obese, are elderly, or have severe illness—major
contraindications to the surgical approach. Radiotherapy
also avoids the risks of anaesthesia and the laparotomy
scar, and iatrogenic mortality is rare. Complications after
radiotherapy arise later than after surgery, although
radiotherapy-related complications are often permanent.
Morbidity is associated with both treatment strategies,
though the most severe complications, such as operative
mortality, urological complications, and tissue damage
from irradiation, have been reduced during the past 20
years. In our experience, the combination of surgery and
adjuvant radiotherapy carries the worst morbidity,
especially long-term (delayed in onset) complications,
that are difficult to record during the follow-up.
Hydroureteronephroses, oedema of the lower limbs,
various vesical complications, and bowel morbidity are
more common and compromising in women who
undergo surgery plus radiotherapy. On the other hand,
the low rate of major complications after radiotherapy
(12%) suggests that this approach is well-tolerated by
most patients.
25% of the surgery-group patients and 26% patients in
the radiotherapy group developed neoplastic recurrence.
The pelvic area (including vagina and cervix, when
present) was involved in 22 (52%) of 42 relapses after
surgery and in 28 (64%) of 44 relapses after radiotherapy.
The women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm had
the most unfavourable pathological prognostic factors and
were at risk of a relapse independently from any other
clinical factor. These data are confirmed by other
previous studies.12,13
Adjuvant radiotherapy was prospectively planned in
patients at high risk of relapse. Our study was not aimed
to assess the usefulness of the postoperative treatment,
though our finding that patients treated with surgery plus
radiotherapy were exposed to early and late complications
of both treatments is important. Clinical prognostic
factors can prove useful to select those patients who
should be treated primarily by irradiation, reserving
surgery for patients who do not need adjuvant treatment.
In Italy, a prospective randomised trial has been under
way since 1993 to assess the best adjuvant treatment
(chemotherapy or radiotherapy) for high-risk patients
after radical surgery for FIGO stage Ib–IIa cancer.
Improvements in local control and survival could be
achieved by combined treatments, which would avoid the
discomforting complications associated with surgery plus
radiotherapy. The most important clinical risk factors that
could indicate benefit of combined treatments are cervical
diameter and lymph node status as assessed by
lymphangiography.
Most women with stage Ib–IIa cervical cancer can be
treated successfully with radiotherapy, whereas a
judicious selection of patients is necessary before planning
primary radical surgery. Histological type should be
included in the selection criteria, because our data show
that radiotherapy was less effective than surgery for
adenocardinoma of the cervix. This finding should resolve
some of the conflicting approaches to this issue.14–16 Our
results suggest that the optimum candidates for primary
radical surgery are women with normal ovarian function
and cervical diameters of 4 cm or smaller, whereas
radiotherapy is preferable for postmenopausal women.
Women whose cervical diameters are larger than 4 cm
should be identified before surgery so that they can
benefit from tailored treatment: radical radiotherapy, with
the option of concomitant radiosensitising chemotherapy
to improve the local control of the disease, or cisplatinbased
chemotherapy followed by radical surgery. The
latter approach offers the advantages of surgery, and the
neoadjuvant chemotherapy will keep to a minimum the
risk of extracervical spread of the tumour without
combining surgery and radiotherapy.17,18 An Italian
prospective randomised trial of radical radiotherapy
versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery in
patients with squamous neoplasia and cervical diameters
larger than 4 cm has been in progress since 1991.
