<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0002</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
CERVICAL cancer is the second most frequent cancer among women worldwide and the most frequent cancer among women in Africa, Asia, and South America.  *eos In the United States, where screening for cervical cancer is readily available, most women who are found to have cervical cancer were not screened regularly.  *eos As a result, about 25 percent of patients with cervical cancer in the United States present with locally advanced disease (stage IIB through IVA according to the staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics). *eos 

The ability of radiotherapy to cure locally advanced cervical cancer is limited by the size of the tumor, because the doses required to treat large tumors exceed the limit of toxicity in normal tissue.  *eos Efforts to overcome this problem have included the use of large-particle radiotherapy, the use of different radiation-fractionation schedules, and the concurrent use of hyperthermia or chemotherapy. *eos 

Theoretically, chemotherapy and radiotherapy could have a synergistic effect, for example, the chemotherapy might increase the sensitivity of the tumor to radiation.  *eos Moreover, radiotherapy could be used for local disease while chemotherapy is used for systemic disease.  *eos Concurrent chemotherapy inhibits the repair of sublethal damage from radiation, synchronizes cells to a particularly radiosensitive phase of the cell cycle, and is cytotoxic in vitro.  *eos The concurrent use of single-drug and multiple-drug regimens with radiotherapy has been tested in women with cervical cancer, but combination therapy has not gained wide acceptance. *eos 

The Gynecologic Oncology Group has performed several prospective, randomized studies of the effect of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy in women with locally advanced cervical cancer.  *eos Radiotherapy combined with treatment with hydroxyurea has been compared in separate trials with radiotherapy alone, with radiotherapy and concomitant therapy with misonidazole, and with radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil (and Whitney CW, unpublished data).  *eos As compared with radiotherapy alone, treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy significantly increased the rate of complete response, progression-free survival, and overall survival.  *eos As compared with treatment with misonidazole and radiotherapy, treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy increased progression-free survival and was less toxic.  *eos However, treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and radiotherapy resulted in greater improvement in progression-free survival and overall survival than did treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy (Whitney CW, unpublished data).  *eos 

At the time we were developing the protocol used in the current study, radiotherapy plus concomitant chemotherapy with hydroxyurea was the standard combined-therapy regimen for advanced cervical cancer, because an early analysis of the combination of radiation, cisplatin, and fluorouracil failed to show improved progression-free survival.  *eos However, myelosuppression is a limiting toxic effect of treatment with hydroxyurea, whereas cisplatin is less myelosuppressive and can be given weekly during radiotherapy, with acceptable levels of toxicity.  *eos In our study, to improve the efficacy of the cisplatin and fluorouracil combination, we added hydroxyurea to the regimen, because of evidence that this drug inhibits ribonucleotide reductase and depletes tumor cells of deoxyuridine monophosphate.  *eos The depletion of deoxyuridine monophosphate may be important because this compound competes with the active metabolite of fluorouracil, fluorodeoxyuridine monophosphate, for the binding of thymidylate synthase.  *eos In addition, the responses in phase 2 trials of this chemotherapy regimen with radiotherapy in patients with cervical cancer and in patients with head and neck cancer were favorable.  *eos Therefore, we undertook a randomized study in which all women with locally advanced cervical cancer received local radiation as well as weekly concomitant treatment with cisplatin alone, the combination of cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, or hydroxyurea alone.  *eos 

METHODS. *eos 

Eligibility. *eos 

The institutions that participated in the study are listed in the Appendix.  *eos Women with untreated invasive squamous-cell carcinoma, adenosquamous carcinoma, or adenocarcinoma of the cervix of International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics stage IIB (localized disease with parametrial involvement), stage III (extension of the tumor to the pelvic wall), or stage IVB (involvement of the bladder or rectal mucosa) were enrolled in the study from April 1992 to April 1997.  *eos All cancers were confirmed histologically by the Gynecologic Oncology Group pathology committee.  *eos Patients with disease outside the pelvis and those with metastasis to para-aortic lymph nodes or intraperitoneal disease were not eligible.  *eos 

Each patient was required to undergo a complete physical examination, a pelvic examination under anesthesia, chest radiography, and intravenous pyelography or abdominal computed tomography to determine the clinical stage of the cancer.  *eos In addition, patients were required to have undergone a specific type of extraperitoneal para-aortic lymphadenectomy.  *eos Patients were required to have a Gynecologic Oncology Group performance status of 0, 1, 2, or 3 (equivalent to Karnofsky performance scores of 90 or 100, 70 or 80, 50 or 60, and 30 or 40, respectively) and to have no history of other cancers.  *eos 

Other eligibility criteria were as follows, a leukocyte count of at least 3000 per cubic millimeter, a platelet count of at least 100,000 per cubic millimeter, a serum creatinine level of no more than 2.0 mg per deciliter (177 umol per liter), a serum bilirubin level that was no more than 1.5 times the upper limit of normal at the institution where it was measured, and a serum aspartate aminotransferase level that was no more than 3 times the upper limit of normal at the institution where it was measured.  *eos Additional pretreatment evaluations included assessment of performance status and measurements of the cervical tumor and serum electrolytes and magnesium.  *eos All patients gave written informed consent according to institutional, state, and federal regulations.  *eos 

Radiotherapy. *eos 

Radiotherapy was administered to the whole pelvic region in 24 fractions totaling 40.8 Gy or 30 fractions totaling 51.0 Gy, followed one to three weeks later by intracavitary brachytherapy (the insertion of a radioactive implant).  *eos Either one or two intracavitary implants were inserted.  *eos The total dose delivered was 40 Gy in patients with stage IIB and 30 Gy in patients with stage III or IVA disease.  *eos The total dose delivered to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cm superior to the cervical os) was 80.8 Gy in patients with stage IIB and 81.0 Gy in patients with stage III or IVA disease, the total dose delivered to point B (the pelvic wall) was 55.0 Gy in patients with stage IIB disease and 60.0 Gy in patients with stage III or IVA disease.  *eos Pelvic radiation was delivered by anteroposterior and posteroanterior parallel ports or a four-field box technique (anteroposterior, posteroanterior, and two lateral fields) with an x-ray energy of at least 4-MV photons.  *eos The pelvic field extended from the upper margin of L5 to the midportion of the obturator foramen or the lowest level of disease, with a 3-cm margin, and laterally 1.5 to 2 cm beyond the lateral margins of the bony pelvic wall (at least 7 cm from the midline).  *eos For the lateral fields, the anterior border was the anterior border of the pubic symphysis and the posterior border was the space between S2 and S3.  *eos The fields could be modified to include areas of known tumor. *eos 

If two intracavitary applications were used, the second was to be given within two weeks after the first implant.  *eos If intracavitary brachytherapy could not be delivered, the tumor was treated with additional external-beam radiotherapy, for a total dose of 61.2 Gy.  *eos Interstitial and high-dose brachytherapy were not allowed.  *eos 

The duration of the radiotherapy was 10 weeks.  *eos Radiotherapy was withheld if a patient had a leukocyte count of less than 2000 per cubic millimeter, and delays of up to one week were also allowed in the event of radiation-related gastrointestinal or genitourinary toxicity.  *eos The length of delays in radiotherapy, in days, was calculated by subtracting the planned duration of radiotherapy (the number of prescribed fractions plus 2 weekend days for every five fractions plus 10 days for each implant) from the actual duration of radiotherapy.  *eos The Radiological Physics Center in Houston reviewed all technical aspects of radiotherapy and verified the calibration of the instruments used.  *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos 

The patients were randomly assigned to receive one of three chemotherapy regimens, which were given concomitantly with external-beam radiotherapy (Table 1).  *eos Treatment with hydroxyurea or fluorouracil was discontinued if the leukocyte count dropped below 3000 per cubic millimeter or the platelet count dropped below 100,000 per cubic millimeter, and it was resumed once the counts rose above these levels.  *eos Treatment with cisplatin was discontinued if the leukocyte count dropped below 2500 per cubic millimeter or the platelet count dropped below 50,000 per cubic millimeter, and it was resumed once the counts rose above these levels.  *eos Adverse effects that required modifications in the doses in subsequent cycles are shown in Table 1.  *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos 

The primary end points were survival and progression-free survival.  *eos Progression was defined as a 50 percent increase in the product of the two largest diameters of the primary tumor or metastasis.  *eos Progression-free survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of the first physical or radiographic evidence of disease progression, death, or the last follow-up visit.   *eos Survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit.  *eos 

We calculated the target sample size of 165 patients for each regimen on the basis of an ability to detect a 35 percent decrease in the rate of disease progression with the use of either radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin or radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea.  *eos The design called for final analysis when disease progression (or death) had occurred in 104 patients receiving the control regimen (radiotherapy combined with treatment with hydroxyurea).  *eos This design provided the study with a statistical power of 80 percent with the use of the log-rank test at an alpha level of 0.025 (by one-tailed test).  *eos At the time of this analysis 104 patients had had progression of disease in the control group and 89 patients had died, with or without disease progression - 86 percent of the number of deaths needed for a final analysis of survival.  *eos Thus, because of the large difference in outcome among the treatment groups and the similarity between the rates of survival and progression-free survival within each of the treatment groups, this analysis is the final analysis of survival and progression-free survival.  *eos 

Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement, the treatment assignments were stratified according to center and the three clinical stages of disease, with approximately equal numbers assigned to each treatment group.  *eos Life-table estimates were calculated according to the method of Kaplan and Meier, and differences in progression-free survival were evaluated with use of the log-rank test according to the intention-to-treat principle.  *eos The Cox model was used to adjust for prognostic factors and to estimate the relative likelihood (and 95 percent confidence intervals) of survival and progression-free survival.  *eos Pearson's chi-square test was used to detect differences in the incidence of adverse effects among treatment regimens.  *eos All reported P values are two-tailed unless otherwise stated.  *eos 

Interim analyses were conducted in May 1994, November 1995, and November 1996 with the use of prespecified critical values (11.1, 10.6, and 10.6, respectively) for the log-rank test with two degrees of freedom.  *eos The performance of these interim tests raised the type I error by only 0.05 percent.  *eos Because of this negligible increase and to simplify the presentation, the P values were not adjusted for the results of the interim analyses.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos 

Characteristics of the Patients. *eos 

From April 1992 to April 1997, 575 patients were enrolled, 192 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin, 191 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 192 were assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy with hydroxyurea.  *eos Forty-nine of these patients (9 percent) were subsequently found to be ineligible for the following reasons, because of deviations from the surgical protocol for the evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes (44 patients), ineligible stage of disease (2), metastasis to para-aortic lymph nodes (1), incorrect primary diagnosis (1), and incomplete pretreatment testing (1).  *eos Thus, a total of 526 patients were included in the analysis, 176 in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 173 in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 177 in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos 

There were no significant differences in the clinical characteristics among the three treatment groups (Table 2).  *eos The analyses reported here were performed in December 1998.  *eos 

Progression-free Survival. *eos 

The relative risk of progression of disease or death was 0.57 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.42 to 0.78) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.55 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.40 to 0.75) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy, after adjustment for the clinical stage of disease.  *eos Patients who received the platinum-based regimens had significantly longer progression-free survival than those who received hydroxyurea (P<0.001 for both comparisons) (Fig. 1).  *eos A multiple regression analysis of progression-free survival was performed that included the prognostic variables identified by Stehman et al, clinical stage of disease, tumor size as assessed by physical examination, status of pelvic lymph nodes, age at diagnosis, and performance status.  *eos After adjustment for these five factors, the relative risks of disease progression for the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea were extremely close (relative risks, 0.58 and 0.55, respectively) to the estimates obtained after adjustment for clinical stage of disease alone.  *eos The rates of progression-free survival at 24 months were 67 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 64 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 47 percent in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos 

Survival. *eos 

The median duration of follow-up was 35 months.  *eos As of this writing, 75 percent of the patients have either died or have been followed for 30 months.  *eos A total of 205 patients have died (39 percent), 59 in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 57 in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 89 in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos After adjustment for the clinical stage of disease, the relative risk of death was 0.61 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.44 to 0.85) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and 0.58 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.41 to 0.81) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, as compared with the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos Survival rates were also significantly better in these two groups (P=0.004 and P=0.002, respectively) than in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (Fig. 2).  *eos A multivariate analysis of survival that was adjusted for the five prognostic factors identified by Stehman et al. yielded essentially identical estimates of relative risks.  *eos 

Site of Progression. *eos 

Patients in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy and the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea had less local progression (19 percent and 20 percent, respectively) than those in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy (30 percent).  *eos Patients in the two cisplatin-treated groups also had a lower frequency of lung metastases (3 percent and 4 percent, respectively) than patients treated with hydroxyurea alone (10 percent).  *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos 

Table 3 shows the number of cycles of chemotherapy (i.e., weeks) administered in each group.  *eos 

Radiotherapy. *eos 

Eight patients did not receive any radiation therapy, and 41 (8 percent) received only external-beam treatment, but these 49 patients were evenly distributed among the three treatment groups.  *eos The number of patients who received within 15 percent of the prescribed total dose to both point A (69 to 93 Gy) and point B (stage IIB, 47 to 63 Gy, stage III or IVA, 51 to 59 Gy) was 159 (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 147 (85 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 149 (84 percent) in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos 

The median duration of treatment was 9.0 weeks (10th and 90th percentiles, 7.1 and 11.9, respectively) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 9.3 weeks (10th and 90th percentiles, 7.6 and 11.6) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 8.9 weeks (10th and 90th percentiles, 7.2 and 11.2) in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos The median delay in administering radiotherapy was computed for the 455 patients who received doses within 15 percent of the prescribed dose to both points A and B.  *eos The median delay was 8 days (the 10th percentile was a time 2 days ahead of schedule, and the 90th percentile was a delay of 22 days) in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin therapy, 10 days (10th and 90th percentiles, 1 and 26) in the group given radiotherapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea, and 8 days (10th and 90th percentiles, 1 day ahead of schedule and a delay of 23 days) in the group given radiotherapy combined with hydroxyurea therapy.  *eos 

Adverse Effects. *eos 

There were no treatment-related deaths.  *eos The types and frequencies of adverse effects are shown in Table 4.  *eos The highest combined frequency of grade 3 (moderate) and grade 4 (severe) adverse effects was associated with treatment with radiotherapy and the three-drug regimen, the frequency in the other two groups was similar.  *eos The frequencies of both grade 3 and grade 4 leukopenia in the group given radio-therapy combined with treatment with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea were more than double the frequencies in the other two groups (P<0.001).  *eos The frequencies of other hematologic effects of both grade 3 and grade 4 - predominantly granulocytopenia - in the group given radiotherapy combined with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea therapy were approximately double those in the other two groups (P<0.001).  *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

Pelvic radiotherapy by itself fails to control the progression of cervical cancer in 35 to 90 percent of patients with locally advanced disease.  *eos Despite improvements in radiation equipment and techniques, in approximately two thirds of the cases, progression occurs within the area that was irradiated.  *eos Thus, locoregional control must be improved.  *eos Since the para-aortic lymph nodes are often the first site of extrapelvic disease and involvement of these nodes was the most important prognostic factor in prior Gynecologic Oncology Group trials, only patients without involvement of the para-aortic lymph nodes were included in our study. *eos 

We found higher rates of survival and progression-free survival among patients who were treated with radiotherapy and either cisplatin alone or cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea than among patients who were treated with radiotherapy and hydroxyurea alone.  *eos Cisplatin is believed to augment the effects of radiation by inhibiting the repair of radiation-induced sublethal damage and by sensitizing hypoxic cells to radiation.  *eos Because of its cytotoxic effect, the drug reduces the bulk of tumors, which leads to reoxygenation of the tumor and entry of the cells into a radiation-sensitive phase of the cell cycle.  *eos In a study of 19 human cervical-cancer cell lines, Britten et al. found that radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin increased the rates of death of these tumor cells.  *eos However, radiosensitivity was increased in only four cell lines, suggesting that the effect of this combined therapy is primarily caused by direct cytotoxicity.  *eos The effects of chemotherapy should not interfere with the planned course of radiation, and one advantage of cisplatin is that it has limited adverse effects on bone marrow.  *eos In our study, the rate of local recurrences was significantly lower with either cisplatin-based regimen than with the hydroxyurea regimen, whereas the rate of distant recurrences, specifically in the lungs, was only slightly less.  *eos These results suggest that the principal effect of cisplatin is radiosensitization.  *eos 

The effect of radiotherapy with concomitant treatment with cisplatin alone has been studied in several phase 2 trials.  *eos Two trials reported improvements in local control of tumors and survival in patients with invasive bladder cancer and in patients with non.small-cell lung cancer.  *eos However, in a small study of 45 patients with cervical cancer, radiotherapy and chemotherapy with cisplatin (25 mg per square meter per week) increased the rate of local control by 35 percent (P<0.025 for the comparison with radiotherapy alone), but there was no long-term improvement in survival. *eos 

Many combinations of cisplatin have been studied in phase 2 trials of patients with cervical cancer.  *eos In a phase 3 trial conducted by the Gynecologic Oncology Group, 388 patients were randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant chemotherapy either with cisplatin and fluorouracil or with hydroxyurea (Whitney CW, unpublished data), the two-drug regimen improved survival (relative risk of death, 0.74, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.58 to 0.95).  *eos In the phase 3 study by Morris et al., whose results are reported in this issue of the Journal, radiotherapy in combination with treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil significantly improved the rates of disease-free survival and overall survival among women with stage IB through IVA cervical cancer.  *eos 

The ability of carboplatin, which is a less toxic analogue of platinum than cisplatin, to act as a chemosensitizer has been assessed in patients with many kinds of tumors.  *eos Although cisplatin and carboplatin are often used interchangeably, we cannot assume that the results of our study also apply to treatment with carboplatin.  *eos 

Hematologic toxicity was the principal adverse effect in this trial.  *eos The frequencies of grades 3 and 4 leukopenia were significantly higher with the three-drug combination than with the two single-drug regimens.  *eos Nevertheless, there were no significant differences in the length of radiotherapy among the three groups.  *eos Souhami et al. used radiotherapy concurrently with treatment with cisplatin, followed by high-dose brachytherapy, to treat 50 patients with cervical cancer.  *eos They found a high rate of response, but 28 percent of their patients had severe late gastrointestinal complications.  *eos Closer analysis of this study showed a dose-dependent effect of the brachytherapy on late rectal complications.  *eos Adverse urologic effects have occurred in mice treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy with cisplatin, but increased rates of urologic complications were not observed in our study. *eos 

The radiation protocol that we used allowed a total dose of 81 Gy to be delivered to point A and anticipated a total treatment time of 10 weeks.  *eos Several studies have suggested that the total length of treatment influences the efficacy of radiotherapy.  *eos In our study, the duration of radiotherapy and the dose of radiation were similar among the three regimens,implying that the differences in progression-free survival and survival were related to the chemotherapy.  *eos 

Our results demonstrate the superiority of radiotherapy and chemotherapy either with cisplatin alone or with cisplatin, fluorouracil, and hydroxyurea in patients with locally advanced cervical cancer (stage IIB, III, or IVA without metastasis to the para-aortic lymph nodes).  *eos Treatment with cisplatin alone was less toxic than treatment with the three-drug regimen.  *eos We recommend cisplatin as the standard drug for radiotherapy and chemotherapy for locally advanced cervical cancer.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0013</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
ALTHOUGH MANY PATIENTS with carcinoma of the uterine cervix are cured with local measures, a substantial minority recur or present with metastases and are potential candidates for systemic therapy.  *eos Unfortunately,the list of active drugs is short and combinations have not shown a consistent improvement over single agents.  *eos Cisplatin is said to be the most active anticancer drug in cervical cancer, although 100 mg/m did not significantly improve the complete response (CR) rate compared prospectively with 50 mg/m (12.7 v 10%, respectively) and there was no appreciable difference in response duration, progression-free interval (PFI), or survival.Thus, there is no convincing reason to use a cisplatindose higher than 50 mg/m. *eos 

Mitolactol (dibromodulcitol) is a hexitol derivative thatis converted into dianhydrogalactitol (DAG) in humanserum.  *eos DAG is probably an alkylating agent.  *eos Previousstudies have shown activity for both DAG and mitolactol in cervical cancer.  *eos A phase II study of the Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) demonstrated activity formitolactol as a single agent in cervical cancer using 180mg/m/d for 10 days by mouth in repeated 4-week cycles.There were 55 assessable patients, with one CR and 15 partial responses (PRs) (29% response rate).  *eos The principal toxicity of mitolactol is hematologic, while that of cisplatin is nonhematologic.  *eos Since both drugs have activityin cervical cancer, it seemed reasonable to evaluate this combination. *eos 

The combination of DAG and cisplatin has previously been studied.  *eos Since there were only 18 assessable patients,the study was too small for definitive conclusions.  *eos Nevertheless, the possibility existed that the combination, with two CRs and five PRs (39% response rate), produced improved results. *eos 

A pilot study used mitolactol plus cisplatin and established a tolerable dose schedule of 180 mg/m of mitolactoldaily for 5 days with cisplatin 50 mg/m.  *eos Although an intermediate dose level (50 mg/m cisplatin and 225mg/m mitolactol daily for 5 days) was considered, it wasnot pursued, since six of 10 patients at the first dose level in the pilot study required dose reductions and/or delays with re-treatment. *eos 

Ifosfamide is a new agent closely related to cyclophosphamide, but with less marrow toxicity and more bladder toxicity that requires concomitant use of the uroprotectormesna.  *eos Treatment of cervix cancer with the combination of ifosfamide, cisplatin, and bleomycin yielded a 69% response rate (49 patients) in one series.  *eos The result was impressive, but the importance of bleomycin was unclear and its toxicity sometimes troublesome, so we proposed to compare cisplatin alone versus a regimen of cisplatinplus mitolactol (C + M) and a regimen of cisplatin plusifosfamide (and mesna) (CIFX). *eos 

PATIENTS AND METHODS. *eos 

Eligible patients included women with histologically confirmed advanced (stage IVB), recurrent, or persistent squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix not suitable for curative treatment with surgery and/or radiotherapy.  *eos Written informed consent was obtained before study entry.  *eos Lesions measurable by physical examination or chest x-ray were required.  *eos Measurements by computed tomography (CT) scan were accepted if the lesion was > 3 cm and sharply defined.  *eos If a measurable lesion monitored by CT scan was less than 3 cm,it must have been confirmed by biopsy or cytology.  *eos A GOG performance score (PS) of 0, 1, or 2 (Karnofsky, 50 to 100) was required.  *eos Patients were to have recovered from effects of recent surgery or radiotherapy and be free of clinically significant infection.  *eos Originally, the protocol was less stringent about renal function and had no specification about serum albumin level.  *eos However, shortly after activation, the study was amended so that the serum creatinine concentration was to be within the institution's normal limits and the serum albumin level was to be >= 3 g/dL.  *eos This change was prompted by reports of encephalopathy on the ifosfamide arm (described in Results). *eos 

Ineligible patients included those with cervical neoplasms other than squamous cell carcinoma or with nonmeasurable cervical cancer, WBC count less than 4,000/uL and/or platelet count less than 100,000/uL, abnormal liver function (bilirubin, AST, or alkaline phosphatase level > two times normal not related to the cancer),bilateral hydronephrosis, GOG PS 3 or 4, past or concomitant malignancy other than skin (excluding melanoma), prior therapy with cytotoxic drugs except when used as a radiation sensitizer, radiationtherapy within 3 weeks of entry, lesions measurable only by ultrasound, or pregnancy or lactation. *eos 

Patients were prospectively stratified according to whether they had received prior radiation-sensitizer treatment (hydroxyurea, cisplatin,or fluorouracil) and by PS, and were then centrally randomized with equal probability to receive (1) cisplatin 50 mg/m with appropriate hydration every 3 weeks for a maximum of six courses, or (2) cisplatin 50 mg/m on day 1 plus mitolactol (180 mg/m orally for 5 days) on days 2 through 6 every 3 weeks, or (3) cisplatin 50mg/m plus ifosfamide 5.0 g/m over 24 hours plus mesna 6 g/m given concurrently with ifosfamide and for 12 hours after, every 3 weeks, again for a maximum of six courses. *eos 

The use of lorazepam was discouraged in such patients in order not to mask the possible neurotoxicity of ifosfamide.  *eos No subsequent treatment course was to begin until the WBC count was greater than 4,000/uL and the platelet count 100,000uL.  *eos Therapy was to be delayed week by week until these levels were exceeded.  *eos Dose adjustments were specified for hematologic, gastrointestinal, renal, and neurologic toxicity.  *eos Toxicity was graded according to standard cooperative group criteria.  *eos If the serum albumin level decreased to lessthan 3.0 g, a dose reduction of ifosfamide to 2.5 g/m was specified. *eos 

CR was defined as the disappearance of all gross evidence of disease for at least 4 weeks.  *eos PR was a >= 50% reduction in theproduct obtained from the measurement of each lesion for at least 4 weeks. *eos 

Statistical Considerations. *eos 

The design for this study was based on the assumption that a 15% increase in the response rate due to the addition of either mitolactolor ifosfamide to cisplatin would be regarded as clinically meaningful.  *eos Therefore, the primary objective of this study was to compare the proportion of patients who responded to the cisplatin-only regimen versus each of the combination regimens.  *eos The null hypothesis was rejected if the probability of the observed result, or a more extreme result, under the null hypothesis was less than 0.025 (one-tail test).A linear logistic model was used to adjust for age, PS, and whether cisplatin had been used as a radiosensitizer.  *eos The adjusted relative risk of survival and progression-free survival (PFS) was assessed with a linear proportional hazards model. *eos 

Ten patients did not receive the randomized study treatment.  *eos These women are classified as nonresponders and grouped by randomized treatment in an intent-to-treat analysis.  *eos They are also included in the analysis of overall survival and PFS, but are not included in the summary of toxicity.  *eos Toxicities are compared between treatment groups by a Kruskal-Wallis rank test (two-tail), adjusting for ties. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos 

Between June 1990 and January 1994, 454 women entered the study of whom 16 were ineligible (wrong stage, n = 2, wrong cell type, n = 9, wrong primary tumor, n = 2, prior chemotherapy, n = 2, second primary tumor, n = 1), which left 438 eligible patients (including 10 who received no drug, all were included in the intent to-treat analysis).  *eos Thus, there were 140 eligible patients on the cisplatin arm, 147 on the C + M arm, and 151 onthe CIFX arm.  *eos Patient pretreatment characteristics were well balanced among the three arms (Table 1). *eos 

Toxicity. *eos 

There was more granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia,and leukocytopenia associated with C + M compared with cisplatin alone (P < .025).  *eos Also, more granulocytopenia, thrombocytopenia, and nausea and vomiting were associated with CIFX versus cisplatin alone (P < .025)(Table 2).  *eos One patient died of urosepsis after six courses of C + M at a time when her blood counts were moderately depressed.  *eos One patient developed renal failure afterone course of CIFX and died after she had refused dialysis.  *eos Peripheral (P = .013) and central neurotoxicity (P = .001) were both significantly more frequent and severe with CIFX compared with cisplatin alone (Table 3), but not so for C + M.  *eos CNS toxicity ranged from confusion to somnolence to coma and/or seizures.  *eos In some patients, fatigue or weakness was reported and ascribed to chemotherapy.  *eos In all cases except one fatal case, CNS toxicity was reversible.  *eos In that case, which occurred early in the trial, the patient had a cardiorespiratory arrest while co-matose.  *eos As a result, the eligibility criteria for the trial were revised.  *eos Subsequent patients were required to have a pretreatment serum albumin level >= 3.0 g/dL and aserum creatinine concentration within the institution'snormal limits, and patients with bilateral hydronephrosiswere ineligible.  *eos These changes were based on a previous report that suggested low serum albumin level, high creatinine concentration, and the presence of pelvic tumor were correlated with severe encephalopathy.  *eos Subsequently, no fatal CNS toxicity was observed, but lesser degrees of encephalopathy continued to be observed more frequently on the CIFX arm. *eos 

Response and Survival. *eos 

There was a significantly greater frequency of response(31.1%) among patients treated with CIFX compared with cisplatin alone (17.8%, P = .004, Table 4).  *eos The frequency of response among those treated with C + M (21.1%) was only slightly greater than cisplatin and not statistically significant.  *eos The median durations of response among those who did respond were 5.5, 7.7, and 10 months, respectively, for cisplatin alone, C + M, and CIFX.  *eos There were 34 stage IVB patients, of whom 31 had no prior radiotherapy, seven of 31 (23%) had a response to protocol chemotherapy.  *eos Response by site of measurable disease is listed in Table 5. *eos 

PFS (Fig 1) adjusted for age, PS, and prior cisplatinas a radiosensitizer was statistically significantly longer for CIFX (median, 4.6 v 3.2 months) compared with cisplatin alone (P = .003), however, there was no difference between C + M and cisplatin alone. *eos 

There was no significant difference in survival between cisplatin and either of the combination regimens (median[months], cisplatin, 8.0, C + M, 7.3, CIFX, 8.3, P =.835) (Fig 2).  *eos Age was associated with survival (P =.025), with younger age being unfavorable (Fig 3), this, in turn, was correlated with a shorter time from diagnosis to study entry.  *eos Initial PS (not shown) was also associated with survival (PS 0 was favorable, P < .001), the median durations of survival for PS 0, 1, and 2 were 10.0, 7.4,and 6.8 months, respectively.  *eos Histologic grade and prior radiotherapy were not significantly associated with survival. *eos 

Chemotherapy concurrently with definitive radiation therapy as a radiosensitizer has been used in some cases of cervix cancer in recent years.  *eos As a consequence, a subset of patients in the present study had such a prior history (Table 1).  *eos The treatment arms were well balanced in this regard and there was no evidence that the treatment comparisons were distorted by this prior treatment.  *eos Nevertheless, among those who received cisplatin as a radio-sensitizer, the risk of death was 47% greater than for those who received prior irradiation without a radiosensitizer (P< .01). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

The results of this trial in cervix cancer reflect a common set of findings in combination chemotherapy of advanced solid tumors, namely, a higher response rate (but not a high CR rate) with a combination compared with single-agent therapy at the cost of more toxicity and no survival benefit.  *eos In the present trial, there was a significant improvement in PFS associated with CIFX, however, its impact on the patient's sense of well-being was not assessed.  *eos Since there was no overall survival improvement, it is unclear to what extent the improvement in PFS or in response rate actually benefitted the patients. *eos 

A phase II trial of bleomycin plus ifosfamide plus cisplatin that used the same dose schedules of CIFX as in the present trial achieved a 20% CR rate.  *eos In that study, the patients tended to be younger, but no criteria for lung function were given and no pulmonary toxicity was reported.  *eos Since the role of bleomycin in cervix cancer is unclear, but implies restricting therapy to patients with good pulmonary function, we elected not to include bleomycinin the present study.  *eos Early experience in randomized phase II trials suggested that bleomycin and vincristine contributed importantly to combination regimens,but other randomized phase II trials have not supported a major role for these agents.  *eos It remains to be seen whether the addition of bleomycin will be helpful, that is the subject of a current randomized trial. *eos 

The C + M regimen was well tolerated, but disappointing.  *eos Mitolactol is clearly active in advanced cervix cancer as a single agent using a schedule of 180 mg/2/d for 10 days every 4 weeks.  *eos The pilot study on which the C +M arm of the present trial was based identified 180 mg/m for 5 days as the maximum-tolerated dose in combination with cisplatin.  *eos Perhaps that dose of mitolactol is too low to provide an additional effect with cisplatin. *eos 

A report that indicated mitolactol therapy of breast cancer was associated with myelodysplasia and secondary leukemias is of concern.  *eos Although we are not aware of such complications in the present trial, the possible risk of secondary malignancies plus the failure to show an improvement in outcome for C + M would suggest a limited future for mitolactol in the treatment of cervix cancer. *eos 

There is a paucity of phase III chemotherapy trials in advanced cervix cancer.  *eos It appears that studies are limited to a comparison of doxorubicin with or without vincristine and doxorubicin plus cyclophosphamide (n = 174),with no difference in response rate, PFI, or survival, a comparison of cisplatin dose schedules, already referred to, a study of cisplatin infusion time (N = 331), and a comparison of carboplatin versus iproplatin (N = 361),with no difference in response rate, PFI, or survival.  *eos A survival benefit was reported in a small trial (25 patients) in favor of cisplatin plus methotrexate over hydroxyurea,but prerandomization was used, PS was not accounted for, and there may have been other imbalances in the treatment arms that could account for the difference in outcome.  *eos The methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin,cisplatin (MVAC) regimen, popularized in the treatment of transitional cell bladder cancer, has recently been reported to be active in cervix cancer.  *eos A large randomized trial will be required to put that regimen in perspective.  *eos Clearly, a select patient population without obstructive uropathy, and without renal or cardiac disease is preferred for such a regimen. *eos 

Cisplatin alone has limited value in advanced cervix cancer, we are not aware of a randomized trial of cisplatin versus supportive care.  *eos Such a study would be of great interest.  *eos One of the earlier GOG trials showed an improved overall response rate (31.4% v 20.7%, P = .015) with double-dose cisplatin (100 mg/m2), but no improvement in CR rate, PFI, or survival.  *eos In contrast, the present trial, which used cisplatin 50 mg/m2 plus ifosfamide, has shown an impact on PFS.  *eos Perhaps this is a step in the right direction, albeit with more toxicity.  *eos In fact, this appears to be the first evidence of an impact of a chemotherapy regimen on PFS in advanced cervix cancer.  *eos Whether this can be translated into a survival benefit by the addition of bleomycin remains to be determined.  *eos More likely, a new generation of highly active agents will be required to move forward.  *eos Fortunately, curative local therapy is available when this disease is diagnosed at a much earlier stage. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0162</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
SINCE JUNE 1973, the therapeutic and toxicologic effects of CMF (cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil) chemotherapy were evaluated at the Istituto Nazionale Tumori of Milan as adjuvant treatment in patients with operable breast cancer and histologically positive axillary nodes.  *eos The aim of the first program was to evaluate whether CMF given after radical surgery was able to alter the course of the disease.  *eos After radical mastectomy, eligible patients were prospectively randomized to receive either no further treatment or 12 monthly cycles of adjuvant CMF.  *eos All our progress reports have consistently demonstrated that there was a significant difference in the relapse-free survival (RFS) favoring patients who received adjuvant CMF.  *eos The 7-yr results of this first program are now available,6 and they confirm the benefit of CMFtreated patients (RFS 49.2%) as compared to women subjected to radical mastectomy alone (RFS 35.8%, p < 0.002).  *eos These results, as well as those reported in similar studies, suggest that the multimodality approach with cyclical combination chemotherapy is indeed an important advance in the strategy of primary management of resectable breast cancer, and therefore it is worthy of more widespread consideration. *eos 

Among the numerous questions to be answered by current adjuvant studies is the optimal duration of treatment.  *eos In fact, a relative shortterm adjuvant systemic treatment would spare the patients a considerable amount of toxicity.  *eos For this reason, in September 1975, we started a new prospective study with the intent to evaluate the possibility of reducing the duration of adjuvant CMF without compromising the therapeutic effect of combined treatment.  *eos The preliminary 3-yr results have shown that in premenopausal women, 6 cycles of CMF yielded results that were identical to those obtained with 12 cycles.  *eos Similar findings were reported in the 4-yr analysis for the total patient population.  *eos This article presents the 5-yr results achieved in our study. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Study Design and Treatment Schedule. *eos Between September 1975 and May 1978, a total of 466 consecutive patients were entered into a prospective randomized study.  *eos Within 4 wk from surgery, patients with TI-3a breast cancer, histologically positive axillary nodes, age < 70 yr, and living fairly close to the Institute were allocated to receive either 12 or 6 cycles of CMF.  *eos Before being allocated to either treatment group, patients were stratified according to the number of axillary nodes involved (1-3 or more than 3).  *eos The technique of block randomization (permuted block of length 4 for 2 regimens) was utilized.  *eos Based on the 3-yr analysis of our first CMF study showing an apparent lack of therapeutic advantage following adjuvant chemotherapy in postmenopausal women, randomization for this group of patients was discontinued at the end of November 1976.  *eos Therefore, all postmenopausal patients were allocated to receive 12 CMF cycles between December 1976 and March 1977 when accrual for postmenopausal patients was definitely discontinued. *eos 

All patients were subjected to either Halsted or modified radical mastectomy, but a small fraction (16%) was subjected to extended radical mastectomy.  *eos No postoperative radiotherapy or any other ancillary treatment was given.  *eos Adjuvant chemotherapy was started within 2-4 wk from mastectomy.  *eos The dose schedule of CMF was as follows, cyclophosphamide (CTX) 100 mg/sq m by mouth from day 1 to day 14, methotrexate (MTX) 40 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8, and fluorouracil (FU) 600 mg/sq m intravenously on days 1 and 8.  *eos No drug was administered from day 15 to day 28, and CMF was recycled on day 29.  *eos A total of 18 patients older than 65 yr (CMF 12, 12, CMF 6, 6) were started on low-dose CMF (MTX 30 mg/sq m, FU 400 mg/sq m).  *eos During treatment, a dose reduction schedule was applied to all patients showing myelosuppression on days 1 and 8 of each treatment cycle.  *eos The dose of all three drugs was reduced by 50% when the leukocyte count ranged from 3900 to 2500/cu mm or the platelet count from 99,000 to 75,000/cu mm. In the presence of more severe myelosuppression, treatment was delayed until at least half of the dose could be administered.  *eos Toxic manifestations other than myelosuppression (e.g., mucositis or cystitis) required temporary dose reduction only if severe. *eos 

Primary treatment failure was accurately assessed by clinical, radiologic, and whenever feasible, histologic examination of the site(s) of first relapse.  *eos All radiographs were repeatedly reviewed by a team of radiologists to confirm the presence and exact timing of recurrence.  *eos At first relapse, treatment was uniform for both groups of women.  *eos The following systemic treatment was mainly utilized, patients in whom estrogen receptors were positive were subjected to hormonal manipulations (ovariectomy in premenopausal women and additive hormonal therapy, particularly tamoxifen, in postmenopausal patients), combined sometimes with chemotherapy.  *eos When estrogen receptors were negative or could not be determined, systemic treatment consisted of combination chemotherapy utilizing preferentially an adriamycin- containing regimen.  *eos Whenever possible, patients who refused second-line cytotoxic chemotherapy were treated utilizing hormonal manipulations according to their age. *eos 

Patient Population. *eos Of 466 patients entered into the study, 7 premenopausal women were considered nonevaluable because of protocol violations.  *eos In fact, the retrospective evaluation of roentgenograms revealed the presence of distant metastases prior to radical mastectomy in 3 patients (CMF 12, 1, CMF 6, 2), while 4 additional women (CMF 12, 3, CMF 6, 1) had fixation of the primary tumor to the underlying pectoral fascia or muscle (T3b).  *eos Therefore, a total of 459 patients were found evaluable for treatment comparison, i.e., 243 women (premenopausal 160, postmenopausal 83) allocated in the 12-cycle group and 216 (premenopausal 164, postmenopausal 52) in the 6-cycle group, respectively.  *eos A total of 22 patients (premenopausal 12/324 or 4%, postmenopausal 9/135 or 7%) refused to complete the planned adjuvant program mainly because of negative psychologic reasons.  *eos This was especially observed in women planned to receive 12 CMF cycles (18 of 243 or 7%) compared to those entered into the 6-cycle regimen (4 of 216 or 2%).  *eos Furthermore, in 5 additional patients, CMF was temporarily discontinued at some time during treatment (for 2-3 mo) because women complained of constant nausea due to oral cyclophosphamide.  *eos All these patients were considered evaluable. *eos 

The majority of our patients (62%) had less than 3 nodes involved, and in half of the women tumors ranged between 2 and 5 cm on pathologic measurement.  *eos Estrogen receptor (ER) status could be determined at the time of mastectomy in 255 women (55.6%) by using the dextran-coated charcoal assay, according to the technique currently used in our laboratory.  *eos ER tumors were considered positive in 177 patients (69.4%), negative in 47 (18.4%), while the remaining tumors (12.2%) were considered to have borderline values. *eos 

The median follow-up at the time of present analysis was 56 mo for the entire series of 459 evaluable patients. *eos 

Study Parameters. *eos Details on baseline studies and follow-up program were as previously reported,1, 2 and they can be summarized as follows.  *eos Prior to mastectomy, all patients underwent complete physical examination, x-ray of chest and skeleton (skull, spine, pelvis, upper third of femurs), liver scan, bilateral mammography, hemogram, and biochemical tests.  *eos In the absence of symptoms, physical examination was performed once a month during the first year following mastectomy, then every 3 mo during the second and third years, and every 4-6 mo thereafter.  *eos Biochemical tests (serum bilirubin, total proteins, alkaline phosphatase, SGOT and SGPT, and LDH) were repeated every 6 mo during the first 3 yr and once a year thereafter.  *eos Chest roentgenogram as performed every 4 mo for the first year and semiannually thereafter, while bone x-rays were carried out twice a year.  *eos Liver scan and mammography of residual breast were done once a year.  *eos In the presence of controversial radiologic findings, examinations were performed more often than originally planned.  *eos The short-term interval between two examinations was planned to carefully assess the exact time and extent of new disease manifestations.  *eos It is noteworthy that the vast majority of our patients did comply with such strict criteria.  *eos In the present series, baseline and routine bone scans were systematically performed in about half of patients.  *eos They were also performed whenever there were suspicious radiographicfindings or persisting bone pain in the presence of negative roentgenograms.  *eos Primary treatment failure was defined as the first documented evidence of new disease manifestation(s) in either local-regional area(s), distant site(s), or a combination of the two. *eos 

Statistical Evaluation. *eos RFS was considered as the time elapsed from the date of radical mastectomy to the first evidence of treatment failure.  *eos The proportion of patients relapse-free or surviving are given for one point in time (5 yr) as derived from plots.  *eos Probabilities represent comparison of the entire plots, computed by use of the productlimit method, and were calculated using the log-rank test and values of significance.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Results as Function of Treatment Programs. *eos Figure 1 shows that the comparative RFS at 5 yr was practically identical in the two treatment groups (CMF 12, 59%, CMF 6, 65.6%, p =0.17).  *eos Table 1 details the results according to menopausal and nodal status.  *eos It appears evident that treatment regimens were unable to significantly affect the RFS within each patient subset.  *eos In postmenopausal women with more than 3 nodes, the difference between CMF 12 (34.4%) and CMF 6 (54.9%, p = 0.18) is only apparent since the confidence-limits throughout the curve totally blurred the percent difference (standard error, or SE, at 5 yr, 8.4 and 11.3, respectively).  *eos It is important to emphasize that overall no RFS difference was documented between preand postmenopausal patients (CMF 12, 59.3% versus 57.6%, CMF 6, 66.5% versus 63.1%,respectively).  *eos The somewhat contrasting results observed in the 6-cycle group in pre- and postmenopausal patients with 1-3 nodes (80.3% versus 66.1%) again reflect only a fictitious difference (SE, 4.1 and 8.1, respectively).  *eos The same is true for pre- and postmenopausal women with more than 3 nodes (45.7% L 6.8% versus 54.9%  11.3%).  *eos On the contrary, in both treatmentand menopausal groups, RFS was affected by the number of involved nodes (Table 1).  *eos Figure 2 shows the 5-yr total survival.  *eos Again, no difference was observed in the two treatment groups.  *eos The same held true when findings were related to menopausal status.  *eos In fact, premenopausal patients in the 12-cycle group had a 72% 5-yr survival compared to 77.1% for women in the 6-cycle group (p = 0.20).  *eos The findings for postmenopausal women were 74.2% and 76.6%, respectively (p = 0.72). *eos 

Site of First Relapse. *eos No difference in the pattern of treatment failure was evident between the treatment groups (Table 2).  *eos It is important to note that the frequency of local-regional recurrences, either alone or associated to distant metastases, was in the range of 8%-10%.  *eos The incidence of contralateral breast involvement alone, which in our series has always been considered as primary treatment failure, was 2.5% versus 2.3%.  *eos No substantial difference was also documented in the pattern of new disease manifestations, either local-regional or distant, between pre- and postmenopausal women. *eos 

Results as Function of ER status. *eos Regardless of the type of treatment, RFS and overall survival were correlated with the presence (ER +) or absence (ER -) of estrogen receptors in the primary tumor.  *eos Table 3 details the findings observed at 5 yr from mastectomy.  *eos As can be seen, RFS was superior in patients with ER + tumors, but this difference failed to reach statistical significance in all patient subsets.  *eos Also, no difference was evident when overall survival of postmenopausal women was examined (ER+ 82.5% versus ER- 76.2%, p =0.32).  *eos By contrast, premenopausal women with ER + tumors had a significantly longer survival than their matches with ER- tumors (79.9% versus 67.6%, p = 0.03).  *eos At present, this difference is somewhat difficult to explain.  *eos In fact, there was no striking difference in the pattern of new disease manifestations between ER + and ER - tumors, since visceral involvement was documented in 31.2% and 35.3%, respectively, of relapsed patients.  *eos However, in spite of the fact that frequency of objective remission was superimposable (-30%) in both ER groups regardless of treatment administered and site(s) of first involvement, the disease in ER + tumors had amore indolent course, while ER - tumors showed further progression within a few months. *eos 

Results as Function of Dose Levels of CMF. *eos The importance of the level of doses administered has been detailed in one of our previous reports. 4 A similar type of analysis was performed on patients entered into this study.  *eos Table 4 shows that also in this series there was evidence of a dose-response effect, regardless of menopausal and nodal status (CMF 12, level I 68.9% versus level 11147.2%, p < 0.05, CMF 6, level I 66.6% versus level III 51.5%, p = 0.10).  *eos Furthermore, within each dose level, there was no statistically significant difference between patients in the 12- or 6-cycle group. *eos 

Early and Late Toxicity. *eos Acute toxic reactions have been previously reported.  *eos Nausea, vomiting, and hair loss were the most distressing side effects.  *eos Myelosuppression represented the dose-limiting factor in the large majority of patients (70%-80%), but severe leukopenia and/or thrombocytopenia were rare (10%), and prolonged myelosuppression beyond the fourth week from drug discontinuation was never observed.  *eos No hematologic or infectious complications from repeated episodes of myelosuppression were documented, and no evidence of liver damage attributable to prolonged administration of methotrexate was detected. *eos 

Only a small subgroup of 22 patients (4.8%) refused to complete the planned program, and this was essentially due to negative psychologic reasons since these patients objected to being on a heavy and toxic treatment program (drug injections and timing of follow-up) without having visible disease. *eos 

Frequency of second tumors was similar in both treatment groups.  *eos As already reported (Table 2), contralateral breast cancer was documented in a total of 11 patients (CMF 12, 6, CMF 6, 5).  *eos Four additional patients showed second tumors other than breast cancer.  *eos In one patient of the 6-cycle group, endometrial carcinoma in situ was documented within 16 mo from mastectomy, 3 patients in the 12-cycle group developed endometrial carcinoma, thyroid cancer, and myoblastoma, respectively, and in all patients second neoplasms were diagnosed between 46 and 49 mo from mastectomy.  *eos So far no patient has developed acute leukemia.  *eos Table 5 presents the comparative frequency of second tumors between our first two CMF programs.  *eos As can be seen, the relative frequency ranged between0.5% for the 6-cycle group and 1.7% for the control group of the previous series. *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos The 5-yr results of the present study are now sufficiently mature to indicate with confidence that 6 cycles of CMF are equivalent to 12 cycles in terms of RFS and total survival.  *eos In fact, in all variables examined, none of the two treatments under evaluation was significantly different from the other.  *eos The observation that in some patient subsets 6 cycles of CMF yielded apparently superior results to 12 cycles is probably related to the relative number of patients in each group and to the different median follow-up in postmenopausal women  whose accrual was discontinued in December 1976.  *eos In fact, confidence limits of the various series totally blurred the difference throughout the curves.  *eos A long-term analysis would probably clarify this aspect.  *eos Besides RFS and survival, other findings would support evidence that 6 cycles of CMF are as effective as 12 cycles.  *eos One of them is the dose level of CMF, the importance of  which has been extensively evaluated in a recent publication.  *eos Our data suggest that the main important pharmacologic factor affecting tumor response is the peak level of drugs administered and not their total amount.  *eos Present clinical findings (Table 4) would indeed substantiate the above-mentioned statement, since no difference was detected when the three different dose levels were analyzed within the two treatment groups.  *eos Another important finding to be considered is the pattern of new disease manifestations where no differencein the frequency of local-regional and/or distant areas was evident between the two treatment groups.  *eos Thus, all above reported findings strongly support our preliminary 3-yr results and indicate that utilizing a single multidrug regimen, it is possible to reduce the duration of adjuvant treatment in operable breast cancer without compromising the therapeutic results.  *eos Present results are in line with those reported in a similar study carried out at the Sidney Farber Cancer Institute.  *eos In this trial, patients with > 4 positive axillary nodes or with a positive node in the highest axillary zone were randomized to receive cyclophosphamide and adriamycin for 5 courses (15 wk) or the same regimen given for 10 courses (30 wk).  *eos Henderson et al.15 reported that at 6 yr of follow-up (median 2.6 yr), no RFS or survival difference was evident between the two groups. *eos 

Our findings can be further utilized to make interstudy comparisons between present results and those of our previous trial.  *eos In fact, patient selection, staging procedures, type of surgery, methods of drug administration, and follow-up examinations were similar in both trials.  *eos Furthermore, all women were accurately treated and followed in a single center by the same staff of surgeons, medical oncologists, and research nurses.  *eos The 5-yr results achieved in the first study are reported in Table 6 and compared with those obtained in the present series.  *eos It appears evident that, (A) the two series given 12 cycles of CMF achieved the same results, (B) the data reported in the three series treated with CMF are almost equivalent, (C) adjuvant CMF, whether administered for 12 or 6 cycles, was able to alter the course of operable breast cancer with positive axillary lymph nodes compared to the group subjected to radical mastectomy alone.  *eos 

Other considerations of practical importance can also be derived from our current findings.  *eos The first and most important one is that there appears to be no real difference following adjuvant chemotherapy, namely CMF, between the RFS of pre- versus postmenopausal women (CMF 12, 59.3% versus 57.6%, CMF 6, 66.5% versus 63.1%, respectively).  *eos We had previously reported4 that the different results observed in our first adjuvant program were probably due to the low-dose CMF started in 31 of 104 postmenopausal patients (30%) because of elderly age.  *eos Low-dose CMF was applied only in 12 of 83 (14%) of the present 12-cycle group and in 6 of 52 (12%) of the 6-cycle group.  *eos Thus, in the present study, only a small fraction of patients was started on drug doses that once more proved to be therapeutically ineffective.  *eos The findings supporting evidence of a therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in postmenopausal patients can also be found in the results reported by other investigators who have never observed that menopausal status affected treatment outcome.  *eos More recently, the Guy's Hospital and Manchester study groups reported the actuarial 5-yr RFS of a randomized study comparing radical mastectomy alone versus melphalan versus CMF and showed that the only group significantly improved by adjuvant CMF was that of postmenopausal women, while premenopausal patients had findings that were superimposable in all three treatment groups.  *eos A trend favoring postmenopausal versus premenopausal women given adjuvant combination chemotherapy was also observed by the NSABP group.  *eos Effective adjuvant combination chemotherapy seems to be unaffected by ER status, at least when RFS is considered.  *eos Our results have been confirmed through different reports.  *eos In spite of initial controversial findings, recent retrospective studies carried out in advanced breast cancer have consistently shown lack of significant correlation between ER status and response rate to cytotoxic chemotherapy.  *eos The results obtained in our series between ER + and ER - tumors, coupled with the overall findings observed in the two menopausal groups, further contribute to minimize the possible therapeutic role of chemotherapy-induced adjuvant castration in premenopausal women.  *eos The fact that premenopausal women with ER + showed a significantlylonger survival than their matches with ER - tumors remains to be further evaluated.  *eos At present, we have no clear explanation for this difference.  *eos Patterns of first treatment failure were not different in the two series and, regardless of treatment instituted upon relapse, frequency of objective remissions were similar between the two groups followed by short-lived remissions in ER - tumors, while ER + tumors tended to show slow growing disease.  *eos Based on our current findings, i.e., therapeutic efficacy of adjuvant CMF regardless of ER status, there seems to be no clinical reason to withhold the administration of adjuvant combination chemotherapy in node positive women even in the presence of ER + tumors.  *eos Whether combined chemotherapy-hormonal therapy in this group of patients could yield superior results compared to chemotherapy alone, remains to be determined not only through appropriate randomized studies, but also through long-term analyses.  *eos The most important practical aspect of our current study is at which point a single drug combination has provided all the benefit possible, i.e., maximal tumor cytoreduction, in the majority of patients.  *eos Through the analysis of our results in advanced breast cancer treated with CMF, Skipper came to the conclusion that in clinically metastatic disease the nadir in surviving tumor cells is probably reached in the majority of patients in less than 6 cycles.  *eos Our clinical findings from anadjuvant treatment support this conclusion and indicate that the maximum therapeutic effect can be obtained with 6 or probably less than 6 cycles of CMF.  *eos Therefore, there are no sound clinical reasons to prolong treatment utilizing the same drugs beyond a 6-mo period.  *eos This observation is indirectly supported by findings obtained at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center where 24 cycles of CMF were unable to obtain results superior to those achieved in our series.  *eos Also, the Arizona group utilizing a different combination regimen, i.e., adriamycin plus cyclophosphamide, for about 6 mo achieved a 5-yr RFS that is very similar to that observed in ourstudies.  *eos Thus, from available reports it appears that different adjuvant treatments consisting of a single multidrug regimen can achieve comparable RFS results regardless of treatment duration.  *eos This is an extremely important clinical observation.  *eos In fact, although both frequency and intensity of acute toxicity from adjuvant therapy such as CMF are moderate, patients can be spared unnecessary side effects, including negative psychologic reactions, if treatment duration is rendered more tolerable.  *eos Moreover, a less protracted exposure to cytotoxic regimens, including alkylating agents and adriamycin, could decrease the potential risk of delayed morbidity, namely cancerogenesis and chronic organ damage.  *eos The reason(s) why RFS was not improved by prolonging chemotherapy once pathologic complete remission has been achieved, in our own trial and in other adjuvant trials for breast cancer, as well as in a variety of neoplastic diseases, can now be interpreted by considering the problem of specifically multidrug-resistant phenotypes.  *eos Briefly, all classes of drugs select and allow overgrowth of specifically drug-resistant neoplastic cells.  *eos Repetitive dose treatments either eradicate all or the vast majority of drug-sensitive neoplastic cells or hold them in check, leaving fluctuating and sometimes larger numbers of drug-resistant cells.  *eos Eventually, and regardless of prolonged chemotherapy, the resistant neoplastic cells overgrow, become clinically evident, and kill the host.  *eos The 40-yr-old mutation theory of Luria and Delbruck developed for bacterial cells was recently adapted to cancer, i.e., neoplastic cells mutate spontaneously to a state of specific resistance to a wide variety of anticancer drugs.  *eos This appears to be a basic law that underlies and explains some (not all) important and consistent observations in the area of cancer chemotherapy.  *eos In our optimal kinetic situation, cyclic or sequential delivery of equally effective and non-cross-resistant drugs often will prevent or delay failures due to overgrowth of drug-resistant sublines of neoplastic cells, as recently demonstrated in advanced Hodgkin's disease.  *eos However, it should be kept in mind that, as emphasized by Skipper, 28 doses and schedules employed usually are of greater importance than the variable of cyclic or sequential delivery of combinations. *eos 

Since our current results with adjuvant CMF are comparable to those utilizing a 5-drug combination or an adriamycin-containing regimen, clinical research efforts should now aim at improving the intrinsic limitation of a single multidrug regimen.  *eos Our current protocols are testing sequential versus alternating delivery of CMF and adriamycin, since our previous experience has demonstrated that both treatments are equally effective and non-cross-resistant.  *eos Furthermore, to insure full drug doses in the new protocols, we have modified the CMF regimen and all three drugs are administered intravenously every 3 wk (CTX and FU 600 mg/sq m, MTX 40 mg/sq m).  *eos In the presence of myelosuppression(leukocytes < 3800/cu mm and/or platelets < 100,000/cu mm) on day 22, treatment is delayed 1-2 wk to allow a constant delivery of full doses. *eos 

In conclusion, the 5-yr results of our randomized study confirm that CMF, particularly when delivered at nearly full doses, can indeed alter the postoperative course of breast cancer with positive axillary nodes.  *eos The presence of specifically multidrug-resistant phenotypes limits the therapeutic effectiveness of a single combination and renders its prolonged administration unnecessary.  *eos Only long-term analysis will answer the questions of whether the addition of adjuvant hormone therapy to chemotherapy will improve the results in ER + tumors and whether the excellent results reported by the M D Anderson Hospital with FAC (fluorouracil, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide) in women with > 4 axillary nodes 7 will be reproducible.  *eos At present, tumor cell burden in the axilla appears to consistently represent an important prognostic factor, even in the presence of full dose chemotherapy, while new prospective trials should explore the potential efficacy of multiple non-cross-resistant drug combinations delivered for a relatively short time. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0234</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Fifty-four patients with advanced breast cancer who had failed prior nonanthracycline combination chemotherapy were randomized to treatment with either epirubicin 85 mg/m2 or doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 intravenously every three weeks.  *eos Of 52 evaluable patients, 25% (six of 24) treated with epirubicin, and 25% (seven of 28) treated with doxorubicin experienced major therapeutic responses.  *eos The median duration of response to epirubicin was 11.9 months compared to 7.1 months with doxorubicin.  *eos Cardiotoxicity was monitored by serial multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography performed at rest and after exercise.  *eos Laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity was defined as a decrease in resting left ventricular ejection fraction of > 10% from the baseline value, or a decrease of 5% or greater with exercise compared with the resting study performed on the same day. *eos 

Fifteen patients treated with epirubicin and 18 patients treated with doxorubicin had at least two determinations of left ventricular ejection fraction and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity.  *eos Using methods of survival analysis, the median doses to the development of laboratory cardiotoxicity were estimated to be 935 mg/m2 of epirubicin and 468 mg/m2 of doxorubicin.  *eos Four patients treated with epirubicin and five treated with doxorubicin developed symptomatic congestive heart failure.  *eos The median cumulative dose at which congestive heart failure occurred was 1,134 mg/m2 of epirubicin compared with 492 mg/m2 of doxorubicin.  *eos Fewer episodes of nausea and vomiting were observed in patients receiving epirubicin.  *eos Epirubicin is a new anthracycline with reduced cardiac toxicity, but preserved efficacy in the treatment of patients with advanced breast cancer. *eos 

DOXORUBICIN (DOX), or Adriamycin (Adria Laboratories, Columbus, Ohio), is one of the most useful antineoplastic agents available.  *eos It possesses a broad spectrum of clinical antitumor efficacy and is the most active nonhormonal drug for the treatment of breast cancer.  *eos Its use, however, is limited by cumulative, dose-dependent, chronic cardiotoxicity.  *eos In retrospective studies, the incidence of symptomatic congestive heart failure (CHF) was estimated to be approximately 3% to 4% after a cumulative DOX dose of 450 mg/m2 and 6% to 10% after 550 mg/m2, the incidence of CHF rises steeply after higher cumulative doses.On the basis of these retrospective studies, an empiric dose limitation of 450 to 550 mg/m2 has been recommended when DOX is used on a standard every three week schedule. *eos 

More recently, however, subclinical cardiac injury has been documented at considerably lower doses.  *eos Cardiac monitoring with noninvasive techniques and endomyocardial biopsy identifypatients being treated with DOX who have asymptomatic functional or morphologic cardiac abnormalities and who may be at high risk for the development of clinical congestive cardiomyopathy.  *eos Discontinuation of therapy in these patients may prevent cardiac failure, but also results in curtailment of the antineoplastic effect of DOX.  *eos One approach to solving this problem is the development of DOX analogues that retain antineoplastic activity but possess reduced potential for cardiac damage.  *eos Preclinical studies suggest that this may be possible by structural alteration of the anthracyline molecule.  *eos Epirubicin (4'-epi-doxorubicin, EPI) is one such compound.  *eos It is a stereoisomer of DOX in which the hydroxyl group at the 4' position of the aminosugar side chain is epimerized (Fig 1).  *eos The antitumor activity of EPI in animal models is similar to that of DOX, but EPI is a less toxic compound with regard to both cytotoxicity and cardiac injury.  *eos In the mouse, EPI and DOX have similar patterns of distribution to various tissues, although drug levels are lower in heart and spleen with EPI.   *eos Pharmacokinetic studies in tumor-bearing mice and rats indicate that EPI is more extensively metabolized by liver than DOX.  *eos The two compounds have similar pharmacokinetic behavior in humans, although EPI is eliminated more rapidly. *eos 

In two clinical phase I studies, EPI was found to have acceptable toxicity at doses of 85 to 90 mg/m2 given intravenously (IV) every three weeks.  *eos The acute toxicity was qualitatively similar to that seen with DOX.  *eos Therapeutic responses were observed in patients with advanced breast cancer in both studies.  *eos Before an analogue of an active drug is accepted for clinical use, its toxicity and efficacy should be compared with that of the established compound.  *eos We used multigated radionuclide cineangiocardiography (RNCA) to assess cardiac toxicity in this prospective, randomized study comparing the efficacy, acute, and chronic toxicities of EPI with DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODSPatient EligibilityThis study was conducted in patients with advanced breast cancer who had progressed after receiving combination chemotherapy.  *eos Patients whose prior treatment included an anthracycline were excluded from this study.  *eos Other criteria for eligibility included a performance status of - 50% (Karnofsky scale), a WBC count - 4,000/14L, a platelet count >- 100,000/L, normal serum bilirubin levels ( < 1.5 mg/dL), and objectively evaluable or measurable disease.  *eos Patients with clinical evidence of active cardiac disease or a left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of < 50% by RNCA were excluded.  *eos 

Pretreatment Evaluation and Follow-up Studies Pretreatment evaluation of patients included complete history and physical examination, complete blood cell count (CBC), 12-channel biochemical profile, serum creatinine, chest roentgenogram, ECG, and bone scan.  *eos Areas of increased uptake on bone scan were further studied with roentgenograms to determine the nature of the abnormalities.  *eos Liver scans were done only if there was elevation of the hepatic enzymes on the biochemical profile.  *eos Blood counts were initially monitored weekly, and then less frequently after the pattern of myelosuppression was established.  *eos Biochemical profiles were repeated every six weeks.  *eos All evaluable or measurable parameters of disease were reevaluated at least every six weeks. *eos 

Study DesignAfter determining eligibility, informed consent was obtained.  *eos Patients were stratified for performance status (Karnofsky scale < 70% v > 80%) and for estrogen receptor status of the primary or a metastatic lesion (positive or unknown v negative).  *eos All patients were then randomly assigned to receive either EPI or DOX.  *eos Randomization was performed using the method of random permuted blocks, which assured an equal number of patients in each arm at specified time points.  *eos 

Treatment ProtocolEPI was supplied by Farmitalia Carlo Erba (Milan, Italy) in a powdered form that was reconstituted with sterile water for injection United States Pharmacopeia.  *eos DOX was prepared in accordance with the package insert.  *eos Both EPI and DOX were administered by slow (five minute) injections through an established IV line every three weeks.  *eos The dose of EPI was 85 mg/m2, and the dose of DOX was 60 mg/m2.  *eos It was anticipated that these doses would produce equivalent degrees of myelosuppression.  *eos Doses were adjusted based on the degree of myelosuppression observed using a predetermined schedule.  *eos Neither patients nor physicians were blinded with respect to treatment.  *eos 

Evaluation of ResponseThe criteria for evaluation of therapeutic response were based on the recommendations of the Breast Cancer Task Force of the National Cancer Institute (Bethesda, Md).17 These guidelines were modified to include a minor response (MR) category for those patients with unequivocal therapeutic responses, but less than that required for a partial response (PR).  *eos Any patient who developed progressive disease within three months of starting therapy was considered to have progressed even if she had demonstrated transient tumor regression.  *eos Duration of response was measured from the first day of initiation of therapy until progressive disease was  documented. *eos 

Evaluation of ToxicityThe percent of projected dose received was calculated for each patient as the average of all doses the patient received (mg/m 2) - 85 if the patient was randomized to EPI and - 60 if the patient was randomized to DOX.  *eos Cardiac toxicity was assessed in all patients by both clinical evaluation and RNCA.  *eos Clinical examination was performed prior to each dose of anthracycline.  *eos RNCA was done with thepatients in supine position at rest and during maximum symptom limited bicycle exercise.  *eos Patients' RBCs were labeled in vivo by injecting 10 to 20 mCi of technetium 99m IV 30 minutes after stannous pyrophosphate injection.  *eos Images of the left ventricle were recorded by positioning the camera in the left anterior oblique position, using a computer-based procedure gated to the electrocardiogram.  *eos LVEF was determined by computer-assisted analysis of left ventricular time-activity curves.  *eos After imageswere obtained at rest for six minutes, supine bicycle exercise was started with graded increment in exercise load and monitoring of heart rate and blood pressure.  *eos Exercise was continued until the patient achieved the maximum predicted heart rate or until limited by fatigue, severe dyspnea, or chest pain.  *eos Imaging was obtained for three minutes at the point of maximal tolerable exercise.  *eos Both resting and, when the patient's condition permitted, stress RNCA were repeated after the first three doses, and after every other dose thereafter.  *eos In our laboratory, during the period of time that this study was conducted, the reproducibility of LVEF determination by RNCA was + 5%.  *eos Therefore, for this study laboratory cardiac toxicity was defined as decrease in resting LVEF of > 10% from pretreatment baseline or a decrease in LVEF with stress of > 5% from the resting baseline obtained on the same day.  *eos Antineoplastic therapy was discontinued if the LVEF decreased to < 40% or if the patient developed clinical congestive heart failure.  *eos In the case of DOX, at a cumulative dose of  50 mg/m2 patients were offered the option to discontinue therapy or to continue with close monitoring of cardiac function with RNCA.  *eos No such dose limitation was imposed for patients on the EPI arm, as the toxic cumulative dose of EPI was not established at the onset of this study. *eos 

Statistical MethodsComparison of response rates between the two arms was made using a chi-square test.  *eos Several other comparisons, such as percent of projected dose, used the two-sample Wilcoxon test.   *eos Cumulative dose to cardiotoxicity and response durations were regarded as right censored variables, which were estimated using the method of Kaplan and Meier.  *eos The log rank test was then used to compare the cumulative dose to cardiotoxicity or the response durations between the two arms.  *eos All hypothesis tests were two-sided. *eos 

RESULTSPatient CharacteristicsA total of 54 women were randomized, 25 to the EPI arm and 29 to the DOX arm.  *eos The characteristics of the patients are presented in Table 1.  *eos Eight patients on the EPI arm and 14 on the DOX arm had received prior radiotherapy to the chest, mediastinum, or thoracic spine that may have exposed the myocardium to ionizing radiation.  *eos In addition, four patients who received EPI and six who received DOX had a history of wellcontrolled systemic arterial hypertension.  *eos Although all patients had received prior chemotherapy which included cyclophosphamide or other alkylating agent, no patient had been previously treated with mitomycin C.  *eos No patient was being treated with digitalis glycosides or antiarrhythmics. *eos 

Dose AttenuationThe percent of projected dose received by patients in each arm was compared.  *eos Doses were reduced more frequently on the DOX arm as compared to the EPI arm, in which two patients' doses were escalated.  *eos The median actual dose administered was 100% of the projected dose of EPI and 86% of the planned dose of DOX (Wilcoxon test, P = .01). *eos 

Response Rates and DurationsTwenty-four patients on the EPI arm and 28 patients on the DOX arm are evaluable for therapeutic response (Table 2).  *eos The additional patient randomized to EPI died with progressive breast cancer and nadir sepsis 15 days after her first dose of EPI, she is excluded from analysis of therapeutic results, but is included in the analysis of hematologic toxicity.  *eos The inevaluable patient randomized to treatment with DOX refused to return for follow-up counts or further therapy, but was alive four months after her only dose of DOX, the patient is also excluded from analysis of hematologic toxicity. *eos 

Complete responses were not observed in either arm.  *eos Six (25%) of the 24 evaluable patients treated with EPI and seven (25%) of the 28 evaluable patients on the DOX arm achieved PRs.  *eos In addition, on the EPI arm, one patient experienced an MR and eight patients had stable disease.  *eos There were seven MRs on the DOX arm and seven patients with stable disease for at least three months.  *eos The median duration of PR for patients responding to EPI was 11.9 months, whereas median duration of PR on the DOX arm was 7.1 months.  *eos Although the major response rates did not differ between the two arms (chisquare test, P = .98), the difference in duration of response is of borderline significance (logrank test, P = .11).  *eos Cardiac toxicity alone did not limit the administration of EPI, but DOX was discontinued in three patients with ongoing PRs because of cardiac toxicity.  *eos Of the 13 patients with PRs, six had tumors that were estrogen receptor positive, six had estrogen receptor negative tumors, and in one patient the estrogen receptor value was unknown.  *eos There was no difference (log rank test, P = .90) in the median time to progression between the patients on the EPI arm (3.9 months) and those on the DOX arm (5.1 months). *eos 

Noncardiac ToxicityHematologic toxicity was similar in the two arms (Table 3).  *eos The median WBC nadir was 2.0 x 103/gL (range, 0.1 to 8.6) and the median platelet nadir was 132 x 103//pL (range, 20.0 to 279.0) in patients receiving EPI, the median WBC nadir was 1.8 x 10'/3tL (range, 0.3 to .9) and median platelet nadir was 130 x 103/pL (range 24.0 to 253.0) in patients on the DOX arm.  *eos One patient receiving EPI died of nadir sepsis.  *eos This patient had been extensively treated with radiation and chemotherapy before treatment on this protocol. *eos 

Other common toxicities included nausea, vomiting, and alopecia.  *eos Nausea or vomiting was documented in 58% of patients who received EPI and 67% of the patients who were treated with DOX.  *eos In general, the nausea and vomiting in patients on the EPI arm was less severe.  *eos Because all patients had been treated previously with chemotherapy, the degree and incidence of alopecia is difficult to assess, however, hair loss was noted in 50% of patients treated with EPI and 35% of those treated with DOX.  *eos Mucositis was observed in only 4% of patients on the EPI arm, and in 6% of patients receiving DOX. *eos 

Cardiac ToxicityEach patient had a baseline RNCA scan, and in all patients the resting LVEF was > 50% with the exception of one patient in whom it was 48%.  *eos All patients are included in the analysis of cardiotoxicity.  *eos Fifteen patients on the EPI arm and 18 patients on the DOX arm had at least one followup RNCA and were evaluable for laboratory cardiotoxicity.  *eos The remaining patients did not have a repeat RNCA because of progressive disease before receiving three doses of anthracycline.  *eos Of the 15 evaluable patients treated with EPI, six had received prior radiotherapy to the chest wall, internal mammary lymph nodes, sternum, or thoracic spine prior to entry on this study, and two had a history of well-controlled mild hypertension.  *eos Of the 18 evaluable patients treated with DOX, seven had prior radiation exposure to the heart, two had hypertension, and two had both hypertension and prior radiotherapy.  *eos Eight patients treated with EPI and nine patients treated with DOX had laboratory evidence of cardiotoxicity.  *eos The median cumulative dose to laboratory cardiotoxicity in these patients was 892 mg/m2 of EPI and 360 mg/m 2 of DOX.  *eos For all patients evaluable for cardiotoxicity by RNCA, laboratory cardiotoxicity data were further analyzed using methods of survival analysis.  *eos The median dose to development of cardiotoxicity for all evaluable patients was 935 mg/m2 for EPI and 468 mg/m2 for DOX (Fig 2A).  *eos The difference is highly significant (log rank test, P < .0001).  *eos These data were also analyzed taking into consideration the difference in myelosuppressive potency between the two drugs.  *eos As noted above, the doses of the drugs were adjusted to produce an equivalent degree of myelosuppression.  *eos Overall, 100% of the planned dose of EPI (85 mg/m2) was administered, however, only 86% (52 mg/m2) of the planned dose of DOX was given.  *eos Thus, all EPI doses were multiplied by 52/85 to compare the two drugs in equivalent units, and Kaplan-Meier estimates plotted (Fig 2B).  *eos The difference remains statistically significant with a P value of .04.  *eos Of the ten remaining patients on the EPI arm and elevenpatients on the DOX arm who are not evaluable for laboratory cardiac toxicity because they did not have a second RNCA study, the total cumulative doses of EPI and DOX were not significantly different, whether or not myelosuppressiveequivalent doses were taken into consideration.  *eos Thus, even accounting for the difference in myelosuppressive potency, EPI is less cardiotoxic than DOX. *eos 

A decrease in LVEF of > 5% with stress was not observed in the absence of a > 10% decrease in resting LVEF from baseline.  *eos Thus, for this patient population, the use of exercise did not appear to increase the sensitivity of the resting RNCA alone.  *eos Nor did all patients experience a steady progressive decline in LVEF, most maintained a stable LVEF until there was an acute decrease.  *eos This sometimes, but not always, occurred  before the development of symptomatic congestive cardiomyopathy. *eos 

Four patients treated with EPI and five patients treated with DOX developed clinical congestive heart failure (CHF).  *eos The cumulative doses of EPI at which clinical CHF was observed (1,035, 1,105, 1,162, and 1,234 mg/m 2) were approximately twice the cumulative doses of DOX at which CHF was seen (456, 480, 492, 560, and 600 mg/m2).  *eos One of the patients who developed CHF on the DOX arm is the patient who had the initial resting LVEF of 48%, this patient also had a history of pulmonary emboli and it was unclear whether this contributed to her cardiac decompensation. *eos 

Six of 11 patients who received more than 450 mg/m 2 of DOX did not develop signs or symptoms of CHF.  *eos Of the patients who developed symptomatic CHF on the EPI arm, one had prior radiotherapy and one had hypertension.  *eos On the DOX arm, one of the patients who developed CHF had prior radiation exposure to the heart, one had hypertension, and one had prior radiotherapy as well as hypertension. *eos 

Survival analysis methods were also applied to compare the cumulative doses to clinical CHF for patients in the two arms.  *eos There was a statistically significant greater cumulative dose to CHF for patients receiving EPI (log rank test, P - .008) with and without adjustment for the difference in myelosuppressive potency.  *eos Since only five patients treated with DOX and four treated with EPI actually developed clinical heart failure, this result should not be overinterpreted.  *eos Among patients who experienced clinical CHF, however, the median cumulative doses to CHF were 1,134 mg/m2 of EPI and 492 mg/m 2 of DOX. *eos 

DISCUSSIONIn this study, EPI had therapeutic activity in breast cancer similar to DOX, but produced less cardiotoxicity than the parent compound.  *eos Long-term administration of DOX on a conventional every three week schedule is limited by the development of dose-related congestive cardiomyopathy. *eos 

Although empiric dose restriction is widely practiced, many patients experience the onset of CHF before they receive 550 mg/m2 of the drug.  *eos DOX cardiomyopathy has been reported in as many as 35% of patients who receive more than 550 mg/m2 of the drug.  *eos In a prospective adjuvant chemotherapy trial for patients with soft-tissue sarcomas, 14% of patients who received 430 to 600 mg/m2 of DOX developed clinical CHF.  *eos Thirteen percent of patients in another recent study developed CHF at a median dose of 405 mg/m 2 when DOX was given on an every three week schedule. 22 With optimal monitoring, one might be able to detect subclinical cardiac injury and prevent CHF by stopping the drug, this implies, however, the interruption of effective antineoplastic therapy.  *eos Several approaches have been proposed to reduce the cardiotoxic effects of DOX.  *eos The use of potentially cardioprotective agents such as vitamin E, N-acetylcysteine, and ICRF-187 has been suggested, but the data have not been sufficiently promising to warrant large scale clinical trials.  *eos Recently, liposomal encapsulation of DOX has been shown to decrease the cardiotoxicity of DOX in experimental animals, although it is unknown whether the drug's antineoplastic effects are preserved. *eos 

Modification of the traditional schedule of DOX administration has been advocated as a method to reduce cardiac injury.  *eos In nonrandomized trials, the use of a weekly DOX schedule has been reported to permit administration of a higher total dose of the drug.  *eos Two recent studies that used endomyocardial biopsy have demonstrated that a larger total cumulative dose of DOX can be tolerated if the drug is given weekly or by continuous intravenous infusion.   *eos Such scheduling may be more costly than the conventional schedule, and may be inconvenient or impractical for both patients and physicians.  *eos Although the data are suggestive, it remains unproven that the antitumor activity of DOX is fully preserved when these schedules are used.  *eos Development of less cardiotoxic, but equally efficacious, anthracylines is an alternative approach.  *eos Studies of structure-activity relationships demonstrate that changes at the position of the aminosugar moiety affect toxicity, and indicate that cardiotoxicity can be separated from therapeutic effect.  *eos Structurally, EPI differsvery slightly from DOX and has the same molecular weight, yet EPI and DOX have different therapeutic, myelosuppressive, and  cardiotoxic potencies in animal systems.  *eos This suggests that EPI might have a better therapeutic index in patients with cancer. *eos 

The optimal method for monitoring the cardiotoxic effects of anthracyclines is controversial.  *eos A combination of RNCA and endomyocardial biopsy is recommended for the individual patient at high risk for whom a therapeutic decision must be made.  *eos However, RNCA alone has also been useful in studying anthracycline cardiotoxicity.  *eos Although endomyocardial biopsy is probably the definitive measure of cardiac injury, RNCA has the advantage of being noninvasive and, therefore, acceptable to virtually all patients in a randomized study of antineoplastic agents.  *eos Potential selection factors that might bias the comparison of cardiac effects are thereby avoided.  *eos In the present trial, EPI was compared with its parent compound in terms of both toxicity and antitumor efficacy.  *eos The observed major therapeutic response rate to EPI (25%) was identical to that observed with DOX (25%).  *eos This is similar to the 27% response rate reported by the Early Clinical Trials Group of the EORTC (European Organization for the Research on Treatment of Cancer).  *eos It was also similar to the combined experience in the literature with DOX as a single agent in previously treated women with breast cancer. *eos 

The therapeutic index of an agent is defined by the relationship between the dosage required to produce therapeutic and toxic effects and by the magnitude of the favorable or unfavorable effects observed.  *eos On a molar basis, EPI was clearly less myelosuppressive than DOX, EPI was also less cardiotoxic.  *eos The difference in cardiac toxicity was manifested by the difference in total cumulative dose at which changes in LVEF occurred (Fig 2A), as well as by the difference in dose at which clinical CHF was seen (EPI, 1,035 to 1,234 mg/m 2 v DOX, 456 to 600 mg/m2).  *eos Although these results could have been affected by the greater incidence of cardiac irradiation inpatients treated with DOX, only three patients who had received such radiotherapy actually developed CHF, one on the EPI arm and two on the DOX arm. *eos 

Whether these findings reflect an improvement in therapeutic index is dependent on the two drugs' dose relationship for therapeutic effects.  *eos Expressed more plainly, is EPI a less cardiotoxic anthracycline, or merely a less potent anthracycline?  *eos In the murine tumor model systems, equal doses of EPI and DOX produce equal therapeutic effects with less host toxicity in the EPI-treated mice, but a clinical assessment can only be based on studies in humans.  *eos There are three prospective randomized comparison studies that address this issue in patients with breast cancer.  *eos In each study, the partial response rates of the EPI and DOX arms were equivalent.  *eos The design of these studies differed, however.  *eos In the present study, each drug was given every three weeks in doses that produced equivalent degrees of myelosuppression, a preplanned limitation on the total cumulative dose of EPI was not used.  *eos Brambilla and coworkers in Milan33 studied equal doses (75 mg/m2) of both drugs every three weeks, they limited the total cumulative dose of each drug to 600 mg/m2.  *eos A third study34 compared two multidrug combinations in which 5-fluorouracil (F) 500 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide (C) 500 mg/m2 were combined with an equal dosage (50 mg/m2) of either EPI (FEC [5-fluorouracil, EPI, cyclophosphamidel) or DOX (FAC) and administered every three weeks, the total dose of EPI was limited to 750 mg/m2 and of DOX to 550 mg/m2.  *eos In the Milan study, the complete plus partial response rate to EPI was 5/11 and to DOX, 7/15, FEC produced a major response rate of 45% compared to a 43% response rate to FAC.  *eos The observations with regard to relative cardiac toxicity in the three studies provide internally consistent and complementary data.  *eos Since the present study did not use a fixed limitation for dose of EPI, patients who did not have progression of tumor were treated to the point of laboratory cardiotoxicity or clinical CHF, therefore, this study provides cumulative cardiotoxicity data that are not available in the other two studies.  *eos The other studies, which did use dose limits, provided data that could confirm the reliability of the survival analysis method we have used to assess the dose effect relationships with regard to RNCA changes. *eos 

In the present study, EPI was found to be significantly less cardiotoxic than DOX, even when the dose is normalized to full myelosuppressive equivalence.  *eos At cumulative EPI doses of 600 to 700 mg/m2, two (13%) of the 15 evaluable patients at risk for RNCA changes developed a decrease in LVEF of > 10%.  *eos In the other single agent study, in which there was an empiric dose limitation of 600 mg/m2, none of the seven EPItreated patients who had RNCA experienced a decline in LVEF of > 10%.  *eos In the multidrug study, no clinical cardiac dysfunction was seen in the EPI-containing (FEC) arm.  *eos In contrast, the present study predicts an incidence of laboratory cardiotoxicity in excess of 70% for those patients who receive more than 600 mg/m2 of DOX.  *eos Although the numbers are small, in the Milan study three of five patients treated with DOX in whom RNCA was performed showed a decrease in LVEF of more than 10% (375, 450, and 525 mg/m2).  *eos In the multidrug study, therapy was discontinued in seven patients on the DOX-containing (FAC) arm because of cardiac dysfunction, including three with heart failure. *eos 

The relatively good cardiac tolerance of EPI observed in the present breast cancer study has been confirmed in our extended phase II experience in other disorders.  *eos Most patients in our trials received less than 550 mg/m2 of EPI, however, in 11 patients receiving cumulative EPI doses from 550 to 1,465 mg/m2, RNCA abnormalities were observed in only four patients at 970, 1,180,1,190, and 1,465 mg/m2, respectively (C.W.  *eos Young, unpublished data, January, 1985, New York). *eos 

Recently, the relative cardiotoxicity of EPI and DOX has also been examined by Torti and colleagues using endomyocardial biopsy.  *eos Although the patients studied were heterogeneous, the data were subjected to multivariate analysis with regard to dose, prior cardiac irradiation, and schedule of drug administration.  *eos Assuming equal therapeutic potency, this analysis indicated that every three week EPI is less cardiotoxic than every three week DOX (P = .0005) and borderline less toxic than weekly DOX (P = .06).  *eos In the present study, RNCA abnormalities correlated well with the presence of symptomatic heart failure.  *eos Although at times a decrease in LVEF was observed immediately before the development of CHF, we were unable to confirm the previously described pattern of predictable progressive decline in LVEF over time for all patients.6 Many patients maintained their left ventricular function at the baseline value until it worsened abruptly shortly before or at the time that clinical CHF was observed.  *eos The sudden onset of clinical deterioration was also reported byBristow who considered this a manifestation of a nonlinear relationship between myocardial structure and function.3 6 Likewise, changes in LVEF in response to stress frequently accompanied a decline in LVEF, but we did not observe such a decline without a concommittant change in resting LVEF.  *eos Thus, while assessment of LVEF by RNCA was useful in quantitating changes in cardiacfunction for the purposes of this study, it cannot be recommended for routine monitoring of individual patients as a predictor of impending cardiac failure. *eos 

Our results show that EPI has therapeutic activity that is similar to that of DOX in patients with advanced breast cancer, and that EPI is a less cardiotoxic drug than DOX, even accounting for the difference in myelosuppressive potency.  *eos In this study, worsening cardiac function forced the premature discontinuation of DOX therapy in three patients experiencing partial responses, whereas effective treatment with EPI was never discontinued because of cardiac toxicity.  *eos These findings, which are supported by the independent work of several other investigators, provide encouragement for further clinical trials with EPI.  *eos Just as schedule modification has reduced the cardiotoxic effects of DOX, 22 exploration of a weekly schedule of EPI administration is warranted.  *eos In addition, the preliminary results from the FEC v FAC combination chemotherapy trial suggest that EPI should be studied further in combination with other active agents in patients with advanced breast cancer. *eos 

ADDENDUMSince this manuscript was prepared for publication, an additional patient treated with DOX developed clinical congestive heart failure in the postoperative period following exploratory laparotomy.  *eos This patient had shown a decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction and was included in the analysis of laboratory cardiac toxicity.  *eos She developed evidence of laboratory cardiotoxicity after a cumulative dose of 615 mg/m of DOX.  *eos No further DOX was administered before her development of clinical congestive heart failure. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0782</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Adjuvant chemotherapy of colorectal cancer has been tested in several randomised trials.  *eos Most studies have shown no significant treatment effects, and a meta-analysis to test the hypothesis of no effect was unable to dismiss this possibility.  *eos More evidence has emerged lately, however, that adjuvant chemotherapy of colon cancer may be beneficial.  *eos The route of administration, the treatment duration, and the drugs to be used are under investigation. *eos 

Liver metastases are observed at diagnosis of primary colorectal cancer in 25-30% of patients.  *eos Overt liver metastases seem to be the first site of relapse for 40-50%of patients with operable disease.  *eos Although liver (and other) metastases may originate from circulating cancer cells, it is also possible that micrometastases occur early in the disease.  *eos 

It is generally accepted that adjuvant therapy should be started as soon as possible after surgery, when the tumour burden is least.  *eos Surgical stress, anaesthetics and other drugs, hypercoagulability, blood transfusions, and surgery-induced impairment of immune function are all reasons why the perioperative period is considered a vulnerable phase in which tumour progression is likely. *eos 

Intraportal injection of cytotoxic agents at the time of surgery for colorectal cancer was advocated in 1957 to prevent liver metastases.  *eos Interest in this treatment was stimulated by the promising findings of a 1979 randomised study.  *eos Based on these results, several prospective randomised comparisons of intraportal infusion of various regimens after surgery and surgery alone were initiated. *eos 

The Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research(SAKK) started one of these trials in 1981 to investigate the effectiveness of a perioperative intraportal cytotoxic regimen with fluorouracil and mitomycin.  *eos The initial response rate was 83%.  *eos We report long-term results here. *eos 

Patients and methods. *eos 

Between July, 1981, and March, 1987, we enrolled 533 patients with adenocarcinoma of colon or rectum who were about to undergo curative resection and were younger than 75 years.  *eos Patients were randomly assigned no adjuvant treatment (control group) or an immediate postoperative intraportal infusion of 500mg/m fluorouracil plus 5000 units heparin in 1 L 5% glucose per 24 h for 7 consecutive days (days 1-7) plus 10 mg/m mitomycin in a single dose on day 1.  *eos Access to the portal vein was through any side branch of the mesenteric venous system.  *eos Portal phlebography was done during the operation or the next day to ensure correct position of the catheter. *eos 

Preoperative investigations included colonoscopy or bariumenema, abdominal ultrasound, chest radiography, haematology, renal and liver function tests, and serum carcinoembryonic antigen measurement.  *eos Postoperatively, blood counts and liver function tests were done on days 1, 3, 5, 7, 10, 14, 28, and 42.Resected tissue was examined by histology and classified (Dukes' classification, Astler-Coller modification).  *eos All surgery and pathology documents were reviewed by the study coordinators and pathologists (see end of paper). *eos 

Patients were stratified according to where the tumour was (ascending, transverse, or descending/sigmoid colon, or rectum) and participating clinic.  *eos To be eligible, patients had to have no evidence of metastatic disease in preoperative investigations. 29 patients had liver metastases diagnosed at resection and 8 had incomplete resection.  *eos We excluded 28 patients, 26 did not have adenocarcinoma (lymphoma, ovarian cancer, urothelial cancer, and others) and in 2 the protocol was violated (radiation therapy to the pelvis was added for rectal cancer).  *eos The analysis was therefore based on 505 patients (table 1). *eos 

All randomised patients were followed up for recurrence and survival every 3 months for 1 year then every 6 months.  *eos Examinations included blood counts, serum carcinoembryonic antigen measurement, and hepatic and renal function tests.  *eos Hepatic ultrasonography, chest radiography, and colonoscopy were done once a year. *eos 

This analysis includes all events up to June 30, 1992.  *eos Time of relapse was defined as the time when recurrent disease was diagnosed or, if later confirmed, when it was first suspected.  *eos Disease-free survival was defined as the time from surgery to relapse, the appearance of a second primary cancer, or death, whichever occurred first.  *eos The 37 patients who had metastases diagnosed at surgery or had incomplete resection were regarded as having relapsed on the day of surgery. 5 patients were lost to follow-up.  *eos All the others had observation times of at least 5 years at the time of this analysis.  *eos Therefore, 5-year disease-free survival and overall survival could be estimated reliably by the Kaplan-Meier method, standard errors were calculated with Greenwoods formula. *eos 

We decided, however, that the estimation of hazard ratios (the ratio of the infusion group to the control group) should take into account all events observed until mid-1992.  *eos Hazard ratios were derived from a proportional-hazards regression model with stratification for localisation of the tumour (colon vs rectum) and with covariates for nodal status (positive vs negative) and age (four groups, defined by the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the age distribution of the evaluable patients-namely, 57, 63,and 69 years).  *eos All probability values were two-sided.  *eos The distribution of site of first relapse is given in terms of simple proportions since the two treatment groups had equal lengths of follow-up.  *eos Subgroup analyses for site of first relapse were carried out with stratification for treatment group, node status, and localisation of the tumour (colon vs rectum).  *eos These were essentially descriptive in nature, therefore we did not attempt to use multivariate methods of evaluation, and the reported p values should be interpreted with caution. *eos 

Among the patients assigned chemotherapy, 69.4% received at least 80% of the prescribed dose of fluorouracil, 75-1% received at least 50%, and 78-4% at least 25%.  *eos Mitomycin was given to78-8% of the patients assigned it.  *eos In 41 patients (17-4%) treatment was assigned but not given because of surgery-related problems (7), difficulties with catheter placement (7), other technical problems (14), patient refusal (2), and various other reasons (11).  *eos All analyses were done according to the principle of intention to treat. *eos 

Results. *eos 

The group assigned perioperative portal chemotherapy had significantly higher 5-year disease-free survival than the control group (table 2).  *eos The hazard ratio for relapse (all events to mid-1992) of treated compared with untreated patients was 0-79 (95% CI 0.62-1.00,p=0.051).  *eos At median follow-up of 96 months, 235 patients had died, 108 in the infusion group and 127 in the control group. 5-year overall survival was also higher in the infusion group (table 2).  *eos The significant advantage of the infusion over the control arm for both overall and disease-free survival is shown in the figure.  *eos The advantage is most pronounced around 5 years after randomisation.  *eos Later the curves come closer together.  *eos The estimates become more unreliable because of censoring and at that time deaths from other causes are more frequent (median age at entry 62 years). *eos 

Subgroup analyses according to primary tumour localisation and nodal status are shown in table 3.  *eos Treatment outcome was similar in all subgroups, and was best in that with positive nodes.  *eos The infusion group had fewer local recurrences and liver metastases with or without relapses at other sites than the control group (table 4).  *eos Among node-negative patients, local relapses were less frequent in those who received infusion treatment.  *eos Similarly, liver recurrences were less frequent in infusion-treated patients within the node-positive and colon-cancer subgroups. *eos 

The 30-day postoperative mortality rate was 1-9% (10/533 patients)-2.3% (6/266) in the control group and 1.5% (4/267) in the infusion group. 1 patient in each group died of myocardial infarction, 2 patients in the control group died of refractory small-bowel obstruction, and 3 patients in each group died of antibiotic-resistant gram-negative septicaemia.  *eos The cytotoxic infusion was judged to be a contributory factor in 1 of the latter cases.  *eos The infusion group had a higher rate of repeat laparotomy and haemorrhage than the control group, especially after abdominoperineal resection of rectal cancer.  *eos Although chemotherapy was started immediately after surgery, it had no significant effect on rates of wound infection, peritonitis, or breakdown of bowel anastomosis.  *eos Transient leucopenia (<3 X10 white blood cells per L) developed in 6 patients during adjuvant chemotherapy, and the white-blood-cell count was significantly lower on postoperative days 7 and 10 in the infusion group than in the control group.  *eos White-blood-cell counts returned to normal during the hospital stay in all but 1 patient.  *eos There were only 2 cases of thrombocytopenia (56 and 71 X 10/L) in the infusion group, but the mean platelet count was significantly lower on day 28 than that in the control group.  *eos These abnormalities had resolved at the first follow-up examination. *eos 

Discussion. *eos 

This trial evaluated the hypothesis that adjuvant portal chemotherapy delivered during surgery and during the early postoperative period would reduce the incidence of liver metastasis and increase survival in patients with colorectal cancer.  *eos The portal catheter could not be placed because of technical difficulties in only 7 patients.  *eos Adjuvant portal chemotherapy was tolerated without an increase in complications compared with untreated patients.  *eos After median follow-up of 8 years we were notable to confirm the overall reduction of liver metastases reported by Taylor et al. We did find, however, a consistent reduction of all kinds of tumour recurrences that resulted in a significant advantage in overall survival and disease-free survival for patients  treated with adjuvant portal infusion, confirming previous findings.  *eos Adjuvant chemotherapy reduced the risk of recurrence by 21 % and the risk of death by 26%.  *eos This effect was observed in all subgroups, but was greatest in patients with tumour-involved lymph nodes (33%) and in those with colon cancer (22%).  *eos 

We know of at least twelve prospective controlled studies with a similar design.   *eos Most were multicentre trials and some excluded patients with rectal cancer.   *eos The adjuvant treatment was given as a continuous infusion for 5-7 days immediately after operation.   *eos Three controlled trials tested the effects of anticoagulants (heparin or urokinase alone) in a three-arm trial design.   *eos In two trials intraportal treatment was compared with systemic cytotoxic drugs. *eos 

Previous investigations, with the exception of one, have shown improvements in overall and disease-free survival  and a reduction in the frequency of liver recurrences, especially in the subgroups of colon  cancer patients and of those with tumour-involved regional lymph nodes (Dukes C).  *eos Two as yet unpublished meta-analyses of all randomised trials comparing portal adjuvant chemotherapy with a no-treatment control group have been conducted by the European Organization on Research and Treatment of Cancer and the Oxford Colorectal Cancer Cooperative Group.  *eos Both analyses are based on data for more than 3000 patients, the results show a  statistically significant overall and disease-free survival advantage for patients who received portal adjuvant therapy.   *eos However, none of the studies couldc onfirm the statistically significant overall effect on the frequency of liver metastases  reported by Taylor et al. It seems likely that the effect of adjuvant portal chemotherapy on overall and disease-free survival can be attributed to the systemic effects of intraportal fluorouracil, which lead to a reduction in all tumour relapses (ie, local recurrences, liver metastases, and other distant metastases). *eos 

We have investigated this hypothesis in a second clinical trial.  *eos Our randomised three-arm study (control vs portal vs systemic adjuvant therapy) was carried out between 1987 and 1993 in 770 patients.  *eos Analyses of haematological toxic effects and postoperative complications show more side-effects in the systemic treatment group than in the portal or control groups.  *eos The median observation time will soon reach 5 years and the first survival analysis will be undertaken. *eos 

Deaths attributable to portal adjuvant chemotherapy have been reported in at least three trials, 1 in Taylor et als study due to perirectal sepsis, 1 in Fielding and colleagues' study (a patient more than 80 years old), and 1 in our trial (an insulin-dependent diabetic man who had gram-negative septicaemia and leucopenia during portal infusion).  *eos For further studies, we recommend that patients with insulin-dependent diabetes, a high risk of postoperative complications (obesity, cardiac, and/or pulmonary disease), or any evidence of intra-abdominal sepsis at laparotomy or during the early postoperative period, should be excluded from participation.  *eos However, the overall operative mortality in all these trials was 3-4% or less.  *eos This low incidence of surgical complications suggests advances in surgical technique and in patient management before and after elective cancer surgery, that allow safe use of adjuvant chemotherapy soon after surgical intervention. *eos 

Based on previous results and our own findings, the Swiss Group for Clinical Cancer Research decided to accept perioperative adjuvant chemotherapy as the standard treatment for further clinical trials in colorectal cancer.  *eos The question of whether systemic chemotherapy gives a greater survival advantage than the less toxic intraportal administration remains unresolved.  *eos We hope that the analysis of our three-arm trial will answer this question soon. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0786</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
RECURRENCE OF rectal cancer in the pelvis after a complete resection represents a major contributor to morbidity and subsequent mortality.  *eos Preoperative and postoperative radiation therapy alone, while reducing the local recurrence rate, has not been shown to improve survival.  *eos In 1985, the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group (GITSG, study GI 7175) reported that postoperative radiation and chemotherapy reduced the tumor recurrence rate for patients who had undergone a curative resection for rectal adenocarcinoma.  *eos Treatment was limited to patients with tumors penetrating the full thickness of the rectal wall or with metastasis to regional lymph nodes.  *eos Although the superiority of combination radiotherapy and chemotherapy with fluorouracil(5-FU) and semustine (MeCCNU) was clearly shown in terms of both disease-free survival and, subsequently,overall survival, the clinical impact of such treatment was tempered by the inclusion of MeCCNU in an adjuvant setting.  *eos The leukemogenic effect of MeCCNU was established subsequent to the initiation of GI 7175, indeed, one patient who participated in GI 7175 developed acute myeloid leukemia after MeCCNU therapy.  *eos Consequently, the GITSG sought to assess the contribution of MeCCNU to the combined modality regimen in study GI 7180.  *eos The results of that study are the focus of this report. *eos 

A two-arm study was designed using the initial radiation/chemotherapy program of the previous study (GI 7175) for both arms of the new study (GI 7180) but to offering MeCCNU to only half the patients during the postradiation period.  *eos The same postradiation regimen of 5-FU and MeCCNU as that used in GI 7175 was chosen for one arm, with the exception that the duration of treatment with postradiation 5-FU and MeCCNU was reduced from 18 months to 12 months in an attempt to reduce the leukemogenic potential of the MeCCNU.  *eos An escalating single-agent 5-FU regimen incorporating a theoretical maximum-tolerated dose was chosen as the alternative treatment option based on clinical evidence suggesting a dose response curve for 5-FU and pilot data from the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute suggesting added efficacy of 5-FU when given at higher dose levels. *eos 

PATIENTS AND METHODS. *eos 

Eligibility and Exclusion Criteria. *eos 

Patients were considered eligible for entry onto the study provided they had histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the rectum and had undergone a surgical procedure at which time all gross tumor had been removed and no evidence of tumor had been present at the resection margins.  *eos The distal edge of the primary tumor must have been <= 12 cm from the anal verge as measured by sigmoidoscopy with the patient in the knee-chest position.  *eos Patients must have recovered from the acute effects of surgery, been capable of starting treatment within 60 days after resection, had no evidence of active infection, had adequate performance and nutritional status to tolerate protocol treatment, and had no preexisting or concurrent malignant tumors except basal cell or superficial squamous cell carcinomas of the skin.  *eos Presence of ascites, peritoneal seeding, residual pelvic tumor, positive paraaortic lymph node biopsy, or distant metastases excluded patients from study, as did previous chemotherapy or pelvic irradiation or any active and significant coexistent disease that, in the judgment of the investigator, would make the risks of chemotherapy or radiation therapy prohibitive. *eos 

Only patients with Dukes pathologic stage B2 (negative nodes, disease extension into the perirectal fat), C1 (positive nodes, no disease extension into the perirectal fat), and C2, (positive nodes, disease extension into the perirectal fat) were eligible, and slides must have been available for review.  *eos Normal hepatic, renal, and bone marrow function (ie, bilirubin level < 2.5 mg/dL, BUN level< 25 mg/dL, or creatinine level < 1.5 mg/dL, leukocyte and platelet counts > 4,500/uL and 125,000/uL, respectively) must have been documented before study entry. *eos 

Randomization. *eos 

Patients considered eligible received a full explanation of the purpose, procedures, and risks of the study, signed a statement of informed consent approved by the local institutional review board, and were then randomized by telephoning a central coordinating center.  *eos Random assignment to treatment was performed by the coordinating center after confirmation of eligibility criteria using a preestablished randomization table. *eos 

Radiation Therapy. *eos 

Supervoltage radiation therapy with the treatment volume to encompass the true and false pelvis was specified by the study protocol.  *eos The superior border of the field was to be the top of the fifth lumbar vertebral body, the lateral border 2 cm lateral to the true pelvic side wall, and the inferior margin of the field was to be determined clinically.  *eos The inferior margin included the perineumin all patients who underwent an abdominal-perineal resection and whose tumor was <= 5 cm from the dentate line.  *eos Parallel-opposed three- or four-field techniques were allowed.  *eos For all other patients, inclusion of the perineum in the radiation field was at the discretion of the investigator.  *eos In cases of perineal exclusion, the inferior margin of the field must have included the lower margin of the ischial tuberosity.  *eos The treatment volume as defined must have received 4,140 cGy at a rate of 180 cGy/d, five treatments per week. *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos 

All patients were to receive intravenous 5-FU 500 mg/m given in a rapid infusion on the first 3 days and last 3 days of radiation therapy.  *eos After the completion of radiation therapy and 5-FU, nochemotherapy was given for 5 weeks.  *eos After this 5-week period, patients received one of the two chemotherapy schedules. *eos 

5-FU and MeCCNU.  *eos The first course on this treatment arm consisted of intravenous 5-FU 300 mg/m2 , days 1 to 5 and 375mg/m, days 36 to 40 given in a rapid infusion.  *eos One dose of MeCCNU 100 mg/m was to be given orally on day 1.  *eos Second and subsequent courses were to be given on the same schedule but with the dose of 5-FU increased to 325 mg/m intravenously, days 1 to 5,375 mg/m2, days 36 to 40, and MeCCNU to 130 mg/m orally on day 1.  *eos Courses were to be repeated at 10-week intervals for a totalof 18 months of treatment.  *eos One year after study activation, treatment duration was decreased to a total of 12 months of treatment due to concerns about the leukemic potential of MeCCNU. *eos 

Escalating 5-FU.  *eos The first course of treatment for patients randomized to this arm consisted of 5-FU 350 mg/m intravenously given in a rapid infusion on days 1 to 5.  *eos Courses were to be repeated at 4-week intervals for a total of six courses of postradiotherapy treatment.  *eos If tolerated, 5-FU doses were escalated in 50mg/m increments each course during the second through the fourth cycle to a maximum of 500 mg/m.  *eos This dose was not to be exceeded for the fifth and sixth courses. *eos 

Dose Reduction Criteria. *eos 

Temporary interruption of radiation therapy was required for leukocyte depression below 2,000/UL and platelet count depression below 100,000/UL.  *eos Concomitant administration of 5-FU during the last 3 days of radiation therapy was to be omitted if the leukocyte count was below 4,000/UL or if the platelet count was below 125,000/UL.  *eos During postradiotherapy chemotherapy, moderate or severe nausea or vomiting required a 50% dose reduction of all chemotherapy for one course, mild stomatitis or diarrhea, continued but not escalated therapy, and moderate or worse stomatitis, reduction of the next course of chemotherapy by 25%. *eos 

Separate criteria for dose reduction were specified for the two postradiation treatment arms.  *eos Each course of treatment was not to be instituted until leukocyte counts were greater than 4,000/yLand platelet counts were above 150,000/UL.  *eos Dose reductions of 5-FU by 25% were required for patients assigned to the 5-FU and MeCCNU treatment arm who experienced a leukocyte count nadir of below 2,000/UL during the first 3 weeks.  *eos MeCCNU dose reductions of 25% and 50% were required if, after 5 weeks, leukocyte nadirs were below 2,500/UL and 1,000/UL, respectively.  *eos If at any time the platelet count nadir was between 25,000/UL and 50,000/UL, MeCCNU was to be reduced by 25%, and by 50% if the platelet count was below 25,000/UL.  *eos Repetition of severe marrow depression (leukocyte count < 1,500/UL) or thrombocytopenia (platelet count < 25,000/UL) after dose reduction or persistent leukopenia (leukocyte count < 4,000/UL) or thrombocytopenia (< 100,000/UL) at 10 weeks after the last dose of MeCCNU disqualified a patient from any further treatment with MeCCNU.  *eos Treatment with 5-FU was to be continued at 5-week intervals.  *eos Dose reduction criteria for the 5-FU escalating arm included no escalation if leukocyte count nadir was below 2,000/UL but at least 1,000/UL and platelet count nadir between 75,000/UL and 99,999/UL and a 25% reduction in the next course for leukocyte nadir below 1,000/UL and platelet count nadir below 75,000/UL. *eos 

Assessment of Radiation Therapy Quality. *eos 

Central review of radiotherapy treatment records including contour and isodose curves, dosimetry calculations, simulation films, verification films for each port displaying treatment fields, and dose prescription was conducted by Dr P.R.M.  *eos Thomas.Deviations in dose and fractionation of up to 5% were considered satisfactory for protocol compliance.  *eos Deviations greater than 5% but <= 10% were considered minor deviations, and deviations greater than 10% were regarded as major deviations.  *eos Variations of field placement were also categorized into minor and major clinicaldeviations. *eos 

Patient Follow-Up. *eos 

The study protocol stated that all patients were to be reevaluated at 3-month intervals for 3.5 years and every 6 months thereafter.  *eos Evaluations were to consist of pertinent medical history, physical examinations, peripheral hemogram, blood chemistries, and chest x-rays at 6, 12, and 18 months, and then annually.  *eos Gastrointestinal series and small bowel follow-up were to be performed at 12 months and barium enema and proctoscopy (if rectum is in place) at 6, 12, and 18 months, and then annually.  *eos Verification that these criteria were followed is unavailable. *eos 

Criteria for Recurrence. *eos 

Disease recurrence required histologic or cytologic documentation with the exception that radiographic techniques could be used to establish the presence of metastases to the lung, liver, bony structures, or brain.  *eos Perineal pain, if preceded by a pain-free interval, was considered indicative of recurrence, and time of recurrence was listed as the time of pain onset.  *eos Only the first site of recurrence was reported.  *eos Recurrence status for patients identified as dead of recurrent disease without adequate documentation was determined by group review, with the examiners blinded to treatment assignment. *eos 

Statistical Considerations. *eos 

The primary objective of this study was to evaluate the effectiveness of an adjuvant treatment with radiation therapy and escalating 5-FU and to compare it with a combination of 5-FU and MeCCNU.  *eos A major goal was to assess the contribution of MeCCNU to adjuvant benefit.  *eos The original design called for the enrollment of 134 patients per arm, and the primary end point was to detect a difference in the 30-month disease-free survival rate from .65 for the MeCCNU-containing arm to .80 for the escalating 5-FU arm.  *eos Despite early termination of accrual due to loss of funding, the results of this study provide important information regarding the potential effectiveness of the escalating 5-FU regimen compared with a MeCCNU-containing regimen.  *eos Given the leukemic potential of MeCCNU, it is important to find a treatment that is at least as effective as a treatment containing MeCCNU.  *eos Using the techniques of Makuch and Simon, it can be shown that a sample size of 100 patients per arm has an 80% power to exclude differences in treatments as great as .19 assuming a = .05 and a 30-month rate of .65.  *eos The potential for MeCCNU to contribute to a result superior to that obtained with escalating 5-FU can be assessed by examining the lower bound of the 95% confidence intervals of relative risk. *eos 

Probability distribution estimates of survival and disease-free survival were performed using the product-limit method of Kaplanand Meier.  *eos When estimating disease-free survival, patients were censored if they were disease-free at last contact (or died free of disease).  *eos All patients who died, regardless of disease status, were counted as events in the survival analysis.  *eos The contribution of variables and treatment effect was tested using the proportional hazards procedures of Cox and the log-rank test. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos 

Patient Cohort. *eos 

Between March 1981 and November 1985, 210 patients were enrolled in this study, 101 were randomized to the 5-FU and MeCCNU regimen, and 109 to the escalating 5-FU arm.  *eos Eleven patients (six receiving 5-FUand MeCCNU and five receiving escalating 5-FU), comprising 5% of the registered population, are not included in the primary analysis as they were determined to be ineligible by an independent review.  *eos Reasons for ineligibility were as follows, colon cancer rather than rectal cancer (five patients), prior history of cancer (two), and incomplete resection (four).  *eos The remaining 199 patients (95% of the registered population) are included for survival analysis in the study group to which they were randomized regardless of whether or not protocol treatment was administered.  *eos Four patients received no protocol treatment and are excluded from the toxicity analyses but are included in the survival and disease-free survival analyses. *eos 

Although the protocol required treatment to begin within 60 days of surgery, 20 patients evenly distributed between the two treatment arms began treatment more than 60 days postsurgery, 16 of the 20 individuals received their initial therapy within 64 days.  *eos The longest delay was 82 days in a patient who developed an intestinal fistula after surgery.  *eos All of these patients are included in the analyses. *eos 

Patient Characteristics. *eos 

Of the 199 patients who comprised the cohort for primary analysis, 95 were randomized to receive postradiation 5-FU and MeCCNU, and 104 were randomized to receive postradiation escalating 5-FU.  *eos Selected patient characteristics show that 58% had disease extension involving the perirectal fat with at least one positive lymph node, 60% of patients are male, and 59% underwent an abdominal-perineal resection (Table 1).  *eos The median age of the 199 patients analyzed was 59 years.  *eos The clinical characteristics were well balanced between the treatment arms, with a slightly higher percentage of patients having disease extension into perirectal fat randomized to receive 5-FU and MeCCNU (61%) compared with escalating 5-FU (56%), and a higher percentage of males randomized to escalating 5-FU compared with 5-FU and MeCCNU (63% v 56%,respectively).  *eos None of these differences were statistically significant.  *eos The median follow-up time for the 108 surviving patients is 5.8 years with 3 years of follow-up available for all but five surviving patients. *eos 

Treatment Administration. *eos 

Two patients on each treatment arm received no adjuvant therapy, and 16 patients assigned to the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm and 18 patients assigned to the escalating 5-FU regimen received no postradiation chemotherapy.  *eos An additional three patients on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm received no MeCCNU after radiation therapy but continued to receive 5-FU.  *eos Reasons for postradiation chemotherapy termination were evenly distributed between patient refusal and toxicity.  *eos As planned in the protocol design, patients on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm were treated for a longer duration than patients who received escalating 5-FU (median, 11.3 months v 7.5 months, respectively).  *eos Also as planned, among patients who received chemotherapy, dose intensity of 5-FU was greater on the escalating 5-FU arm versus the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm.  *eos Although patients received a median total dose of 12.4 g/m of 5-FU on the escalating 5-FU arm (25% < the planned level of 16.5g/m) and 13.1 g/m of 5-FU on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm (23% < the planned level of 16.9 g/m), the median monthly dose of 5-FU on the escalating arm was 1.74g/m, compared with 1.40 g/m on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm (P < .001).  *eos Patients randomized to 5-FU and MeCCNU received a median total dose of MeCCNU of.37 g/m2 (25% < the planned level of .49 g/m), and a median of .08 g/m of MeCCNU per 10-week course.  *eos Approximately one third of patients (41 of 104) randomized to the escalating 5-FU arm were escalated to at least one 5-day course of 500 mg/m of 5-FU. *eos 

Central review of compliance with radiation therapy confirmed that the majority of patients were treated as per protocol, with discrepancies occurring equally in each treatment arm.  *eos In all, 16% of patients were found to have clinical deviations.  *eos Dosimetry deviations were limited to 5% of the cases.  *eos No patients were excluded from analysis due to deviations from the radiotherapy protocol. *eos 

Toxicity. *eos 

Toxicities experienced by patients on the two arms are comparable, 53% of patients on the 5-FU and MeCCNUarm (52 of 99) and 50% of those assigned to the escalating 5-FU arm (54 of 107) experienced at least one episode of severe or worse toxicity as defined by the GITSG toxicity scale.  *eos Life-threatening toxicities were reported in six (6%) 5-FU and MeCCNU patients and 11 (10%) escalating 5-FU patients.  *eos Leukocyte depression below 1,000/UL accounted for a majority of these episodes (eight patients on the escalating 5-FU arm and three on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm).  *eos Platelet count depression below 20,000/UL was reported for two patients receiving 5-FU and MeCCNU.  *eos Toxicity resulted in either a temporary or permanent decrease in dose, interruption of part of therapy, or interruption of all therapy in 62% of 5-FU and MeCCNU patients and 53% of escalating 5-FU patients.  *eos Permanent interruption of all therapy due to toxicity occurred in 11% of 5-FU and MeCCNU patients and 14% of escalating5-FU patients. *eos 

Two treatment-related deaths were reported, one on each treatment arm.  *eos One event occurred in a 50-year old man assigned to receive escalating 5-FU.  *eos Twelve days after treatment initiation and after receiving the initial 3 days of 5-FU and 4 days of radiation therapy, he experienced life-threatening episodes of myelosuppression, stomatitis, and seizures.  *eos The patient died of septicemia and pneumonia 24 days after treatment initiation.  *eos At the time of death the patient's leukocyte count was below 500/UL.  *eos One patient on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm is reported to have died of complications of intestinal obstruction, although confirming evidence documenting this event is not available.  *eos This patient was free of disease by computed tomography scan, and the death is considered treatment-related.  *eos Six patients are reported to have experienced severe (three) or life-threatening (three) treatment-related intestinal obstructions, two receiving the 5-FU and MeCCNU regimen and four on escalating 5-FU (Table 2).  *eos Three patients were successfully treated with nasogastric suction and supportive therapy alone and three underwent surgical reexploration.  *eos In three patients the small bowel obstruction appeared to occur at an anatomic site remote from the radiation field.  *eos One patient developed intestinal obstruction during the radiation therapy. *eos 

No episodes of acute myeloid leukemia have been reported on either arm of the study. *eos 

Disease Recurrence. *eos 

Disease recurrence has been documented in 48% of eligible patients including 54% (51 of 95) of patient srandomized to receive 5-FU and MeCCNU and 43% (45of 104) of patients randomized to receive escalating 5-FU (Table 3).  *eos Of the 96 recurrent patients, 10 died of disease without adequate documentation and were classified as recurrences by group review.  *eos Recurrences involving local sites occurred in 17% of 5-FU and MeCCNU patients and 16% of escalating 5-FU patients.  *eos Significantly (P = .05) more recurrences involving distant sites have been documented on the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm (40%) compared with the escalating 5-FU arm (26%).  *eos The probability of 3-year disease-free survival on the two arms is 54% and 68% for patients assigned to the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm and the escalating 5-FU arm, respectively, median time to recurrenceis estimated to be 4 years and greater than 4 years, respectively (Fig 1).  *eos The difference in disease-free survival favors the escalating 5-FU arm, but this difference is not statistically significant (P = .20, two-tailed). *eos 

The prognostic importance of Dukes stage, resection type, distance to the nearest margin, age, sex, and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status score on disease-free survival was examined in the cohort of eligible patients.  *eos When included in the Cox model, Dukes stage, resection type, distance to the nearest margin (<= 3 cm v other), and the interaction between resection type and distance to the nearest margin were found to be significant without adjustment for multiple comparisons in predicting disease-free survival(P < .05).  *eos After adjustment for these variables, the 5-FU and MeCCNU and the escalating 5-FU treatment results remained statistically indistinguishable (P = .30,two-tailed).  *eos In fact, the adjusted relative risk (RR) for tumor recurrence associated with the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm is 1.25 (95% confidence interval [CI], .84 to 1.66), when considered individually without adjustment for covariates, it is estimated to be 1.30 (95% CI,.87 to 1.94). *eos 

A secondary analysis of disease-free survival considering all patients randomized regardless of eligibility status resulted in an estimated RR attributed to treatment with 5-FU and MeCCNU and adjusted for important covariates of 1.21 (95% CI, .83 to 1.88).  *eos Similarly, when only eligible patients who received post-radiation therapy drug treatment were considered (84 escalating 5-FU and 72 5-FU and MeCCNU patients), no difference in direction or magnitude of the RR estimate was observed (RR = 1.17, 95% CI, .74 to 1.85). *eos 

Mortality. *eos 

A total of 91 deaths have been reported, 46% (44 of95) on 5-FU and MeCCNU and 45% (47 of 104) on 5-FU.  *eos Eighty-one of the deaths were attributed to progressive disease, and one death was reported without documented cause, the causes of death for the remaining nine patients were attributed to treatment (two patients, discussed above), myocardial infarctions (five,three of whom had a suspected recurrence), stroke (one), and metastatic disease resulting from a new primary tumor arising in the bile duct (one).  *eos Six of the deaths unrelated to disease occurred in patients receiving escalating 5-FU and three in patients receiving 5-FU and MeCCNU.  *eos The one death with no cause reported was on the escalating 5-FU arm.  *eos Kaplan-Meier estimates of 3-year survival probabilities for patients assigned to 5-FU and MeCCNU and escalating 5-FU are 66% and 75%, respectively (Fig 2).  *eos There is no difference between the two arms with respect to the survival distributions (P = .58, two-tailed).  *eos The RR for death associated with 5-FU and MeCCNU adjusted for stage, resection type, and distance to the nearest margin is 1.10 (95% CI,.68 to 1.52, P = .67).  *eos Median survival has not been reached in either treatment arm. *eos 

Figure 3 compares the survival prognosis of patients undergoing abdominal-perineal resections and patients undergoing anterior resection with distance to margin of resection (as determined by the pathologist on fresh specimen) of <= 3 cm and greater than 3 cm. Patients undergoing anterior resection with distance to the margin greater than 3 cm experienced improved survival compared with patients undergoing anterior resection with distance to the nearest margin <= 3 cm, suggesting that abdominal-perineal resection should be considered when the distal margin for resection with the low anterior route would be <= 3 cm. *eos 

As in the disease-free analysis, secondary analyses of survival considering either all patients randomized or only patients who received treatment after the completion of radiation therapy, resulted in no meaningful change in direction or magnitude of the RR attributed to treatment with the 5-FU and MeCCNU regimen (RR = 1.10, 95% CI, .72 to 1.67, and RR = 1.04, 95% CI, .65 to 1.67, respectively). *eos 

A stage-wise comparison of the results of this study with GI 7175 in which the same staging criteria of GI 7175 were applied to GI 7180 shows that reducing the chemotherapeutic regimen of 5-FU and MeCCNU from 18 months to 12 months did not significantly alter the survival outcome for patients.  *eos There were no differences between the radiation and escalating 5-FU arm of GI7180 and the radiation and 5-FU and MeCCNU arm of GI 7175 with respect to survival within any stage (Fig 4). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

The results of this study indicate that treatment after surgical resection of Dukes B2 and C rectal cancer with escalating 5-FU postradiation therapy provides similar survival and recurrence outcomes as a postradiation chemotherapeutic regimen including the leukemogen MeCCNU.  *eos Both survival and disease-free survival results favor the escalating 5-FU arm, although these differences did not reach statistical significance.  *eos Fewer recurrences involving distant sites occurred on the escalating 5-FU arm compared with the 5-FU and MeCCNU arm, further suggesting that MeCCNU is not an essential component of the postradiation chemotherapy treatment.  *eos Although similar rates of local recurrence were experienced on the two study arms, the similarity in outcome is not surprising as both arms used identical postsurgery radiation therapy regimens including 5-FU. *eos 

In any adjuvant study, toxicity of therapy must be carefully assessed.  *eos Toxicity in GI 7180 was nontrivial with one treatment-related death reported in each arm and half of the patients in both arms experiencing at least one episode of severe or worse toxicity.  *eos As expected, myelosuppression was the most common toxicity seen in both arms.  *eos Although there were twice as many intestinal obstructions among patients receiving escalating 5-FU, no association with type of chemotherapy can be drawn from these small samples.  *eos Because of toxicity, patients often received no therapy beyond the initial radiation treatment.  *eos The risk to the patient, however, is balanced by the expected survival benefit.  *eos To date, no patient treated with 5-FU and MeCCNU in this study has developed leukemia. *eos 

Results from the previous GITSG study (GI 7175) of adjuvant therapy after surgical resection of Dukes B2 or C rectal cancer demonstrated improved survival and disease-free survival in patients treated with combination radiation therapy and post radiation therapy using 5-FU and MeCCNU when compared with surgery alone, and improved disease-free survival for patients treated with this combined modality therapy compared with radiation therapy alone.  *eos The results of the present study confirm the expected survival and disease-free survival probabilities observed in the combination therapy arm of the previous GITSG study, while the recent report by the North Central Cancer Treatment Group (NCCTG) further demonstrates the advantage of combination radiation therapy and chemotherapy compared with radiation therapy alone in reducing recurrence rates and improving survival.  *eos Although data from the initial rectal cancer adjuvant trial conducted by the National Surgical Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP RO1) suggested improved survival and disease-free survival in patients treated with chemotherapy alone compared with surgery alone, that study did not include a combined modality treatment arm. *eos 

Progress has clearly been made in the adjuvant treatment of rectal cancer.  *eos A recent National Institutes of Health consensus conference on adjuvant therapy for patients with colon and rectal cancer concluded that combined postoperative chemotherapy and radiation therapy improved local control and survival in stage B2 and C patients with rectal cancer and that treatment with combined modality therapy in these patients is recommended.  *eos The only combined modality regimens examined until now have included MeCCNU.  *eos The results of this study show that comparable results can be achieved using a combination regimen that does not include MeCCNU, this conclusion is also supported by preliminary data reported by the NCCTG. *eos 

GI 7180, a protocol designed more than a decade ago, used a treatment plan that most likely is now outdated. *eos 

The protocol-mandated radiotherapy dose (4140 cGy) may be suboptimal.  *eos Different methods of 5-FU administration (eg, rapid infusion, prolonged continuous infusion) have been compared in an attempt to maximize radiation sensitization and further reduce the rate of locoregional recurrence.  *eos Furthermore, studies in metastatic colorectal disease demonstrating enhanced efficacy of 5-FU when administered with leucovorin, as well as a recent report indicating a reduction in the rate of recurrence in colon cancer when levamisole was added to adjuvant 5-FU, have led to an intergroup trial assessing the value of such combinations as adjuvant therapy for rectal cancer (Intergroup Rectal Adjuvant protocol, Int 0114, activated August 1990). *eos 

It appears highly unlikely that further follow-up in GI 7180 will result in 5-FU and MeCCNU treatment being superior to escalating 5-FU.  *eos The increased leukemicpotential of MeCCNU makes the drug additionally undesirable to include in the adjuvant setting.  *eos Therefore, we conclude that MeCCNU is not an essential component of effective postoperative combined modality treatment of adjuvant rectal cancer and should not be included in future treatment regimens.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0787</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Rectal cancer is one of the most common malignant diseases with 11 500 cases diagnosed in the UK in 1994 alone.  *eos Little change has been seen in survival rates, which remain at about 40% at 5 years from diagnosis.  *eos In an attempt to increase the rate of curative resection and hence survival, several trials have investigated the role of preoperative radiotherapy in treatment of rectal cancer.  *eos The first UK Medical Research Council (MRC) trial of preoperative radiotherapy for rectal cancer was a three-arm randomised trial with 824 patients comparing a control (surgery alone) group with a group treated with 20 Gy given in 10 equal fractions and another treated with a single exposure of 5 Gy.  *eos These doses of radiation were chosen after trials by the Veterans Administration Surgical Adjuvant Group and the Princess Margaret Hospital, Toronto, suggested survival advantage with radiotherapy for patients with tumours of Dukes stage C.  *eos Despite the suggestion of a real biological effect of the radiotherapy in the first MRC trial, with significant changes in tumour stage, no advantage was found for either radiotherapy group over the control group in terms of disease recurrence or survival.  *eos However, the trial did demonstrate the importance of fixity as a prognostic factor. 80% of mobile tumours had apparently curative resections compared with 50% of partially fixed, and 30% of fixed tumours.  *eos The importance of fixity was reflected in the survival pattern, 5-year survival for fixed or partially fixed tumours was just 29% compared with 48% for mobile tumours.  *eos 

In 1981, the MRC began this trial of a higher dose of preoperative radiotherapy in patients with fixed or partially fixed tumours of the rectum who were thought to be suitable for abdominoperineal excision or anterior restorative resection.  *eos The aim was to increase the number of patients in whom curative resection could be done, and so improve survival rates.  *eos The dose of radiation (40 Gy in 20 fractions over 4 weeks) was chosen as the highest that was deemed safe before anterior resection with the wide-field technique proposed.  *eos We present the results of this trial with a minimum follow-up time for surviving patients of 5 years.  *eos 

Patients and methods.  *eos 

Eligible patients were men or women younger than 80 years who, had histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the rectum partially or totally fixed within the pelvis with the lower margin of the tumour within 15 cm of the anal verge, were deemed suitable and fit for the proposed treatment and available for regular follow-up, were free of disseminated disease (confirmed by clinical and radiological examination), and had had no previous malignant disease.  *eos We gained local ethics committee approval for the study and consent from the participants.  *eos 

When an eligible patient was enrolled, the randomised treatment allocation was obtained by means of a telephone call to the MRC Cancer Trials Office in Cambridge.  *eos Eligibility was confirmed and treatment allocated by minimisation on three factors, treatment centre, extension of tumour (fixed or partially fixed), and intended operation (abdominoperineal excision or anterior restorative resection).  *eos Patients then proceeded to immediate surgery or to radiotherapy followed by surgery after a minimum of 4 weeks.  *eos 

Megavoltage radiotherapy was started as soon as possible after randomisation.  *eos Two parallel opposed fields 18 cm by 15 cm were positioned to cover the tumour with an adequate proximal margin (normally 5 cm). 20 daily fractions of 2 Gy at the mid-plane central axis of the volume of the tumour were given over 4 weeks.  *eos 

Patients were seen every 3 months for 1 year, then every 6 months for 4 years.  *eos Patients who completed 5 years follow-up and those who were lost to follow-up were flagged on the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (OPCS) register so that we would be notified of date and cause of death.  *eos At each visit, the status of the abdominal and perineal wounds was assessed, late complications of treatment recorded, and evidence of local or distant recurrence noted.  *eos Criteria for suspicion of local recurrence were pain, increasing in severity and requiring medication, or disturbance of bladder function, induration in the perineum or pelvis on examination, or palpation of a mass in the pelvis or at the anastomosis.  *eos Biopsy samples were taken whenever possible, and pelvic radiography was done to look for evidence of bone destruction.  *eos 

Event-free times were recorded from the date of randomisation.  *eos For the analyses the date of first local recurrence was taken as the date of the first new clinical or histological evidence of local recurrence, we included an assessment of clinical evidence of local recurrence at death.  *eos The date of first confirmed distant recurrence was also recorded.  *eos Disease-free survival time was measured from randomisation to the first event (local or distant recurrence, or death from any cause).  *eos For all these endpoints, event-free times were censored at 5 years from randomisation, because at this point a large proportion of surviving patients had been discharged from hospital follow-up, and accurate continuing data on disease recurrence were no longer available.  *eos Survival times were not censored at 5 years, all surviving patients have been flagged on the OPCS central register, and were presumed alive on Jan 1, 1995.  *eos 

Statistical analysis. *eos 

We intended to enrol 450 patients (with the anticipation of 251 deaths), this sample size would have provided 90% power to detect a 15% increase in the 3-year survival rate (from 35% to 50%), which was thought plausible at the time the trial was designed.  *eos Based on accrual to the previous MRC preoperative radiotherapy trial, we expected that this number would be accrued in 4 to 5 years.  *eos 

Proportions were compared by the  2 test, and ordered categorical data by the Mann-Whitney test.  *eos Survival curves were calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method, and compared by the Mantel-Cox version of the log-rank test.  *eos Hazard ratios were calculated for all endpoints, a hazard ratio of less than 1 indicates benefit to the radiotherapy group.  *eos All analyses were carried out by intention to treat.  *eos 

Results. *eos 

Recruitment into the trial started in November, 1981, and ended in November, 1989, when 279 patients had been enrolled, 140 patients were allocated surgery alone and 139 preoperative radiotherapy (figure 1).  *eos Recruitment, initially steady, declined after publication, and perhaps misinterpretation, of the disappointing results of the first MRC trial of low-dose radiotherapy.  *eos After 7 years of accrual, only slightly more than half the required number of patients had been entered.  *eos We decided to continue the trial only until the launch, in November, 1989, of the UK Coordinating Committee on Cancer Research (UKCCCR) adjuvant X-ray and fluorouracil infusion study (AXIS) for treatment of colorectal cancer.  *eos This ongoing trial includes randomisation with respect to preoperative radiotherapy for rectal tumours.  *eos 

Of the 279 patients, 217 died.  *eos The surviving patients were followed-up for a minimum of 5 years with the exception of seven patients, lost to follow-up within 5 years of randomisation, who could not be traced through the OPCS and were censored at the date last known to be alive.  *eos 

Pretreatment characteristics of the patients were well balanced (table 1). 69 (49%) of 140 patients allocated surgery only had partially fixed tumours and 71 (51%) had fixed tumours.  *eos Of the 139 patients who had radiotherapy and surgery 69 (50%) had fixed tumours and 70 (50%) had fixed tumours.  *eos Abdominoperineal excision was the intended operation for about two-thirds of patients in both groups.  *eos 

125 (90%) patients received the planned dose of 40 Gy over 4 weeks.  *eos Nine patients received less than the prescribed dose of radiation, two received no radiotherapy because they were judged too ill, three failed to complete the full treatment because of their deteriorating condition, and treatment was stopped early in four patients (ischiorectal abscess and perineal breakdown, bowel obstruction, a prearranged time for surgery, and refusal to continue by the patient).  *eos A further five patients received slightly higher doses of radiation than planned to accommodate altered fractionation schedules.  *eos 

Of patients who received radiotherapy, 61 (45%) of 137 reported no significant morbidity. 45 (33%) of all patients suffered diarrhoea and 30 (22%) had skin reactions.  *eos Only four (3%) patients complained of nausea and 3 (2%) of abdominal pain.  *eos 

The median time from randomisation to surgery was 7 days (IQR 4.12 days) for patients allocated immediate surgery and 73 days (64.84) for those allocated preoperative radiotherapy.  *eos The distribution of type of surgery done was very similar in the two treatment groups (table 2), with about half the patients in each group having abdominoperineal excision.  *eos The presence of residual disease in the pelvis, abdomen, or both, was assessed.  *eos Of patients allocated radiotherapy, 73 (55%) were found to have no residual disease, compared with 66 (48%) of the patients who had surgery alone.  *eos Surgeons were asked to assess whether the operation had been curative, palliative, or indeterminate.  *eos Of patients allocated surgery alone, 56 (40%) of 140 were thought to have had curative operations compared with 66 (47%) of 139 patients allocated radiotherapy (p=0.21).  *eos 

Three patients allocated surgery alone were considered unfit for surgery.  *eos Nine patients allocated preoperative radiotherapy did not have surgery-seven were not fit, one patient refused, and one was not referred back after radiotherapy.  *eos 

The presence or absence of each of six specific postoperative (occurring within 30 days of surgery) complications was recorded, together with any postoperative deaths (table 3).  *eos Surgeons were also asked to report any other complications.  *eos There was no evidence of an excess of complications in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

Pathological assessment of the resected tissue was done for patients from both treatment groups (table 4).  *eos 

Tumours were significantly smaller in the radiotherapy group (Mann-Whitney, p.0.0001).  *eos The proportion of tumours graded as Dukes C was significantly lower in the radiotherapy group than in the surgery alone group (29 vs 59%, p.0.0002) and the number of involved lymph nodes was also smaller.  *eos However, the number of lymph nodes examined was lower in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

At follow-up, surgeons were asked to report on the status of the patients' abdominal and (if applicable) perineal wounds, and to describe, in broad terms, any late complications.  *eos Again, there was no evidence of an increased number of late complications in the radiotherapy group, two patients in each treatment group still had complications of the abdominal wounds 12 months after surgery.  *eos Among those who had abdominoperineal excision, four of 49 patients who had surgery alone who were assessable at 12 months had complications of the perineal wound compared with seven of 56 patients allocated radiotherapy.  *eos The most common complications that occurred throughout follow-up were of the genitourinary system, these occurred in 18 patients in each treatment group.  *eos Complications associated with the colostomy were reported in ten surgery alone patients and eight radiotherapy patients, and five patients in each group had anastomosis-related complications after anterior restorative resection.  *eos 

Figure 2 shows Kaplan-Meier curves for time free of local recurrence. 65 patients allocated surgery alone had a recurrence compared with 50 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos The log-rank comparison suggests an advantage for the radiotherapy group of borderline statistical significance (p=004).  *eos The hazard ratio is 068 (95% CI of 0.47-0.98), which suggests that preoperative radiotherapy reduces the risk of local recurrence by a third.  *eos However, the data are compatible with a reduction in the risk of as much as a half or as little as 2%.  *eos 

Survival free of distant recurrence is also shown in figure 2. 67 patients allocated surgery alone had a distant recurrence compared with 49 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos A reduction in the risk of metastatic recurrence was found which was, rather unexpectedly, of a similar order to the reduction in local recurrence (hazard ratio 0.66 [0.46-0.95], log-rank p=0.02).  *eos 

Consistent with the results of the individual endpoints, results for disease-free survival also suggest a benefit to the radiotherapy patients (hazard ratio 0.76 [0.58-1.0], log-rank p=0.05).  *eos Disease recurrence or death within 5 years occurred in 108 patients allocated surgery alone and 96 of those allocated radiotherapy.  *eos 

Of the 279 patients randomised, 217 have died, 114 (81%) of 140 patients allocated surgery alone and 103 (74%) of 139 patients allocated radiotherapy, median survival times are 24 months and 31 months, respectively.  *eos Median follow-up time for the patients who survived is 10 years.  *eos Although less than two thirds of the planned sample size was achieved, 217 (86%) of the 251 deaths anticipated, if the planned 450 patients had been entered and followed up for 3 years, have occurred.  *eos The hazard ratio for death from any cause is 0.79, giving an estimated reduction in the risk of death for patients allocated radiotherapy of 21% (log-rank p=0.10).  *eos However, the 95% CI for this hazard ratio is wide (0.6-1.04) indicating that the data are also compatible with no advantage to radiotherapy (figure 3).  *eos 

We attempted to classify causes of death, taking the principal cause named on the trial death form or the OPCS death certificate.  *eos Necropsy was done rarely and so causes of death should be interpreted with caution.  *eos However, cause-specific survival analysis suggests a larger benefit for radiotherapy.  *eos Fewer deaths were reported to have been from colorectal cancer or complications of the disease or its treatment among patients allocated preoperative radiotherapy than among those allocated surgery alone (85 vs 103, hazard ratio 0.71 [0.54-0.97], p=0.02).  *eos This estimate indicates a substantial decrease in the risk of death from colorectal cancer in patients allocated radiotherapy, although the data are compatible with a halving of the risk of death from colorectal cancer at one extreme or as little as 3% reduction in risk at the other.  *eos 

Discussion. *eos 

The extended follow-up period of the study enabled us to come close to achieving our objectives despite failure to enroll the 450 patients required for the trial design.  *eos The effects of radiotherapy on recurrence of cancer and survival are similar to the estimates on which the trial design was based.  *eos Failure to recruit the planned number of patients is reflected in the wide 95% CI seen for each of the main endpoints.  *eos 

There was evidence of benefit from preoperative radiotherapy before the trial.  *eos The reasons for investigating preoperative radiation therapy were, reduction in size of the primary tumour and frequency of regional node metastases before resection, a reduction in the frequency of local pelvic recurrence and of distant metastasis from cancer cells released during resection (preoperative treatment can inhibit the proliferation of malignant cells whether they remain local or spread outside the pelvis after radiation), radiation responsiveness of cancer cells may be greater before surgery when they are normally oxygenated than afterwards when they may be hypoxic because of surgical effects on the vasculature, and a lower frequency of late radiation enteritis because the small bowel is less likely to be adherent in the pelvis.  *eos 

In line with the earlier trials we found no increased frequency of early or late complications in the patients who received radiotherapy.  *eos There were significant reductions in tumour size and grade and in the rates of local recurrence and distant metastases in the radiotherapy group.  *eos There was a suggestion that the risk of death from colorectal cancer was reduced, and a trend towards an improvement in overall survival.  *eos However, the trial was of sufficient size to detect only substantial improvement in overall survival.  *eos 

The trial was aimed at a specific disease subgroup - patients with locally advanced but otherwise operable rectal cancer (defined in the first MRC trial as fixed or partially fixed).  *eos Patients in this subgroup have a much lower potential for curative surgery as well as a much poorer rate of survival even when curative surgery appeared to have been achieved.  *eos In the earlier trial surgeons were asked only to record their preoperative findings with respect to fixity, but in this trial they were asked to base a crucial decision on type of treatment on these observations.  *eos Patients in the preoperative radiotherapy treatment group, in which a moderately high dose of radiation was to be used, had their surgery delayed by 2 months (1 month to cover the radiotherapy fractionation and a further month for tumour regression to occur and for the normal tissues to recover from the radiation).  *eos Whereas surgeons showed little reluctance to accept the 2 weeks of low-dose radiation of the first trial, especially because there was no requirement for further delay before the operation, they were reluctant to allow their patients to be open to what they saw as the risks of delayed surgical treatment in this trial.  *eos This reluctance may have hindered recruitment to the trial.  *eos Also there was a general misinterpretation of the outcome of the initial trial of low-dose radiotherapy.  *eos In addition, the patients selected for this study represent only a small proportion of total operable cases.  *eos 

The case for preoperative adjuvant radiotherapy has been supported by several trials published since this trial started, including the European trial reported by Gerard and colleagues.  *eos In that study of 466 patients, the survival benefit of 69% in the treated group versus 59% in the surgery-only group also failed to achieve statistical significance (log rank p=0.08).  *eos Several Swedish studies have advanced the case for the use of preoperative rather than postoperative radiation in terms of better patient compliance, greater reduction in local recurrence rates, and lower morbidity.  *eos None of these studies has concentrated specifically on locally advanced tumours.  *eos Pahlman and Glimelius reported evidence that the reduction in volume of tissue irradiated through three portals instead of the two used in this and most other trials, has resulted in reduced postoperative morbidity and mortality.  *eos Moreover, current practice is to give a short course of high-dose radiation (25 Gy over 5.7 days) and to proceed to immediate surgery, thus avoiding the long delay before surgery.  *eos 

Since the trial was closed, surgeons have been entering patients in large numbers into the AXIS trial in which there is randomisation with respect to preoperative radiation for patients with rectal cancer, with the Swedish model of short, high-dose therapy.  *eos The combined evidence from all these trials should yield sufficient numbers to answer precisely the questions of the effect of preoperative radiotherapy on local and distant recurrence, and above all the effect on survival.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0811</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
ADVANCED colorectal carcinoma is one of the most common oncologic challenges encountered in the Western world.  *eos Nevertheless, there is little evidence of effective therapy for such patients other than symptomatic and supportive care. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) is considered by many as the standard of chemotherapy, but in larger experiences with this agent, response rates have only been in the 15% to 20% range.  *eos These responses are usually partial, sometimes questionable, and generally very transient.  *eos To date there has been no convincing evidence that any chemotherapy of colorectal cancer contributes to either the duration or the quality of life. *eos 

Although a large number of alternative drugs have been studied in colorectal cancer, none has exceeded the meager effectiveness of 5-FU.  *eos A hope frequently pursued in clinical research has been that the activity of 5-FU can be enhanced either by adding the activity of other cytotoxic drugs or, more recently, by favorably modulating the effects of 5-FU itself.  *eos Although enhanced activity by such methods has occasionally been suggested in pilot studies or in phase 2 trials, these claims have seldom been substantiated by the essential definitive study-a randomized comparison with 5-FU used alone.  *eos The purpose of the study reported here is to evaluate, by such a randomized and controlled comparison, a number of recent approaches that have either been shown in animal models to enhance 5-FU activity or have been claimed to produce favorable results on the basis of early human trials.  *eos We chose for our evaluation the combinations of 5- FU with thymidine, with N-(phosphonacetyl)-Laspartic acid (PALA), with levamisole, and with methyl CCNU, vincristine, and streptozotocin (MOF-Strept). *eos 

Thymidine given at high doses in animal model systems has been shown to increase both therapeutic activity and toxicity of 5-FU and to improve the therapeutic index of this agent.  *eos These effects presumably occur through the action of thymidine in blocking oxidative metabolism of 5-FU and increasing 5-FU incorporation into RNA.  *eos Rustum demonstrated in colon 26 tumor and in a transplanted colon tumor in rats that thymidine plus 5-FU produced a significant prolongation of survival time when compared with 5-FU alone.  *eos Studies by Woodcock et al, by Kirkwood and Frei, and by Vogel et a1 demonstrated that in humans, pretreatment with thymidine increased the biologic activity of 5-FU up to eight-fold as measured by hematologic toxicity.  *eos In the study of Woodcock et al, the single colorectal cancer patient treated who was not a prior 5-FU failure had a response of 8 months duration.  *eos They also observed one additional response among patients who had failed 5-FU.  *eos In the study of Vogel et al, two of five previously untreated colorectal cancer patients responded for 4 + and 7 months. *eos 

PALA is a potent inhibitor of aspartate transcarbamylase and has a broad spectrum of activity in animal model tumor screens.  *eos In human trials the dose-limiting toxicities were mucocutaneous reactions with minimal hematologic effects.  *eos Overall therapeutic results were discouraging, specifically in colorectal cancer, a Mayo Clinic study demonstrated only one response among 30 patients, a study of the Baltimore Cancer Research Program showed no responses among 21 patients, and a New York Memorial study demonstrated only two minor responses among 19 evaluated patients.  *eos Continued interest in PALA, however, was stimulated by animal model evidence that this agent inhibits pyrimidine synthesis and thereby enhances 5-FU activity by increasing its conversion to fluorouridine monophosphate (FUMP).  *eos Synergistic activity with the PALA-5-FU combination was demonstrated in murine tumor systems.  *eos Pilot and phase 2 trials of this combination in humans showed the dose-limiting toxicity to be mucocutaneous effects.  *eos In the phase 2 trial of Bedikian et al, a relatively discouraging 14% response rate was recorded among 50 patients, but an additional 54% were stated to have achieved "disease stabilization." *eos 

Levamisole is an agent that has been used extensively to treat parasitic infections in man and domestic animals.  *eos It has also been shown to have immunomodulatory effects.  *eos Two randomized, controlled studies have raised the possibility that it may have some role in the treatment of colorectal carcinoma.  *eos The first was a small surgical adjuvant study reported by Verhaegen et al in which levamisole-treated patients had a significantly improved survival when compared with untreated controls.  *eos The second study, conducted at the University of Wisconsin (Madison), showed that advanced-disease patients treated with combined 5-FU and levamisole lived significantly longer than patients treated with 5-FU alone.  *eos If this result could be confirmed it would be the first time that any regimen has demonstrated such significant survival improvement for advanced colorectal cancer in randomized trials. *eos 

In 1981, a New York Memorial study reported a 32% objective response rate among 77 patients treated with MOF-Strept.  *eos In a randomized trial, this group showed that this combination produced superior response rates and survival when compared with their own variant of the 5-FU, methyl CCNU, vincristine combination.  *eos In contrast, however, the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group reported only a 4% response rate among 41 patients treated with MOF-Strept and they discouraged further use of this combination.  *eos Again it would seem appropriate that the activity and toxicity of the MOF-Strept combination be placed in perspective by a randomized comparison with 5-FU alone. *eos 

With this background we initiated a randomized controlled comparison of 5-FU alone with 5-FU plus high-dose thymidine, 5-FU plus PALA, 5-FU plus levamisole, and MOF-Strept.  *eos We elected to use survival as our primary endpoint in patients with both measurable and nonmeasurable disease and also to evaluate objective response rates among those patients with measurable disease. *eos 

METHODS. *eos 

Patient Selection. *eos 

All patients were required to have histologic or cytologic confirmation of unresectable or metastatic colorectal cancer.  *eos An exception to the requirement for histologic confirmation of metastasis was made in the patient with a previous histologically confirmed primary colorectal carcinoma and who presented with multiple pulmonary metastasis that had shown progression on two chest x-rays taken at least 1 month apart.  *eos Patients could be entered with either measurable or nonmeasurable disease.  *eos Measurable disease was defined as a tumor mass that could be clearly measured in two dimensions on either physical examination or chest x-ray.  *eos Malignant hepatomegaly was used as a measurable lesion if a clearly defined liver edge extended at least 5 cm below the xyphoid process or costal margins on quiet respiration.  *eos A radioactive liver scan could be used to document a measurable lesion if there was a clearly defined perfusion defect measuring at least 5 cm in greatest diameter.  *eos It was also required that the patient be ambulatory and maintaining a reasonable state of nutrition.  *eos Contraindications to selection included a WBC count < 4.000/mm or a platelet count < 130.000/mm. a serum creatinine > 1.5 mg/dL. complete disability (Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group IECOG] performance score 4). recent major surgery (exploration and biopsy only. < 14 days, resection or bypass surgery, < 21 days), an uncontrolled infectious process. frequent vomiting or severe anorexia, any previous chemotherapy, and intensive radiation to the axial skeleton within the preceding 4 weeks.  *eos Tissue from each patient was submitted to a pathology review committee to ensure eligibility and proper histopathologic classification. *eos 

Randomization Procedures. *eos 

After determining eligibility and obtaining written informed consent, patients were stratified according to performance score and the presence and location of measurable disease.  *eos Patients were then randomized to treatment with 5-FU alone, 5-FU plus PALA. 5-FU plus thymidine. 5-FU plus levamisole, or MOFStrept. *eos 

Treatment Methodology. *eos 

5-FU alone. 5-FU was administered in undiluted form by rapid intravenous (IV) injection at a dose of 500 mg/m2 daily for 5 consecutive days.  *eos Courses were repeated every 5 weeks. 5-FU plus thymidine.  *eos Thymidine was administered by a single IV infusion over 90 minutes at a total dose of 45 g.  *eos Two hours following initiation of the thymidine infusion. 5-FU was administered by rapid IV injection in a single dose of 300 mg/m'.  *eos The single doses of thymidine and 5-FU were repeated at 4-week intervals. 5-FUplus PALA. 5-FU was administered by rapid IV injection at a dosage of 300 mg/m2 for 5 consecutive days.  *eos PALA was administered by rapid IV injection at a dose of 625 mg/m2/d for 5 consecutive days.  *eos On day I. 5-FU was administered 4 hours after PALA.  *eos On days 2 through 5, 5-FU was administered after PALA. but no delay was required.  *eos Courses of therapy were repeated every 5 weeks. 5-FU plus levamisole. 5-FU was administered in undiluted form by rapid IV injection at a dose of 500 mg/m 2/d for 5 consecutive days.  *eos These courses were repeated every 5 weeks.  *eos Levamisole was administered orally at a dose of 50 mg every 8 hours on days 14, 15. and 16, and days 21. 22. and 23 of each 5- FU cycle.  *eos This corresponded to the regimen used by Davis et al.  *eos 

MOF-Strept. 5-FU was administered in undiluted form by rapid IV injection at a dose of 300 mg/m 2/d on days I through 5 and 36 through 40.  *eos Methyl CCNU was administered orally at a dosage of 30 mg/m 2/d on days 2 through 6.  *eos Vincristine was administered by rapid IV injection at a dose of I mg/m 2 on days I and 36.  *eos Streptozotocin was administered by rapid IV injection at a dose of 500 mg/m2 on day I and every 7 days thereafter.  *eos This cycle of treatment was repeated every 10 weeks.  *eos This corresponded to the method used by the New York Memorial group. *eos 

For all regimens.  *eos WBC count and platelet counts were obtained weekly.  *eos For the 5-FU plus thymidine regimen, patients were evaluated every 4 weeks, while for all other regimens, this evaluation occurred every 5 weeks.  *eos The evaluation consisted of a history and physical examination, measurement of indicator lesions. hematology and chemistry panel (including serum creatinine), urinalysis, and a chest x-ray.  *eos If the chest x-ray was negative pretreatment. this was repeated only with every other evaluation.  *eos If severe toxicity had been obtained with a previous treatment course, drug dosages were appropriately reduced with subsequent therapy.  *eos Treatment was continued until disease progression was documented. *eos 

Evaluation of Results. *eos 

The primary endpoint of our overall study was patient survival.  *eos It was planned to enter a minimum of 300 eligible and evaluable patients.  *eos For the comparison of any one of our drug combinations with 5-FU. this would permit our test for treatment effect to have .90 probability of detecting a true doubling in survival time (eg. from 6 to 12 months). while having only a .05 probability of obtaining a false-positive result when there were no true differences in survival. *eos 

A secondary objective was to assess objective response rates among those patients who had measurable disease.  *eos Standard criteria for declaring objective response were used. ie. a 5017 or greater reduction in the product of longest perpendicular diameters of bidimensionally measurable lesions or a 30% or greater decrease in the sum of liver measurements below the xyphoid process at costal margin.  *eos It was required that this result be observed at least 4 weeks after the onset of therapy, but there was no requirement for duration of response. *eos 

Statistical Methods. *eos 

Each combination regimen was compared to treatment with 5- FU alone with respect to duration of survival following randomization, time to disease progression. objective regression rates among measurable patients, and toxic reactions.  *eos Survival curves were constructed using the Kaplan-Meier method.  *eos The log rank statistic was used to assess consistency of the data with equality of survival curves, while the Cox partial likelihood score statistic was used to assess consistency of the data with the hypothesis that any one of the combinations would yield at least a 50% improvement in survival over 5-FU alone.  *eos More generally, the Cox proportional hazards model was used to inspect the association of treatment with survival when adjusting for covariates.  *eos P values were two-sided.  *eos Interim analyses of the survival data were performed using the O'Brien-Fleming group sequential boundary as a guideline.  *eos Early termination did not occur.  *eos Thus, essentially no adjustment of the P values given below is required. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos 

A total of 347 patients were randomized on this study.  *eos The entries of two patients were cancelled after randomization, and ten patients were found to be ineligible.  *eos The primary reason for ineligibility (seven patients) was failure to confirm metastatic disease according to protocol criteria.  *eos Four patients were lost to analysis due to ineligibility or cancellation on the 5-FU alone arm, four patients on 5-FU plus PALA, two patients on 5-FU plus thymidine, two patients on MOF-Strept, and none on 5-FU plus levamisole.  *eos A total of 335 eligible patients were properly started on therapy and are included in the analysis below.  *eos These represent 97% of all patients randomized.  *eos At the time of this writing the study is very mature with 318 patients (95%) having shown progressive disease and 278 patients (83%) having been followed to the time of death.   *eos The pretreatment characteristics of our patients are displayed according to the treatment arm in Table 1.  *eos It is noteworthy that most of these patients were in excellent general condition.  *eos Seventy-six percent had an ECOG performance score of 0 or 1.  *eos Fifty-five percent had measurable disease, primarily in liver or lung.  *eos There are imbalances between treatment arms in sex ratio, grade of anaplasia, and patients admitted to study with progressive pulmonary lesions but no histologic proof of metastasis. *eos 

Toxicity. *eos 

The toxic reactions experienced according to treatment arm and severity are documented in Table 2.  *eos MOF-Strept was characterized by substantially more frequent and more severe nausea and vomiting, and this was the only regimen characterized by a substantive incidence of thrombocytopenia. 5-FU plus PALA had substantially more frequent mucocutaneous reactions and somewhat more frequent diarrhea, but less hematologic toxicity than 5-FU alone or any of the other regimens.  *eos On the other hand, 5-FU plus thymidine had a reduced incidence of mucocutaneous reactions and of diarrhea with comparable hematologic toxicity when compared with 5-FU alone.  *eos The most unique toxicity of this regimen was a substantially increased incidence of neurologic effects.  *eos These reactions were primarily headache (seven patients), lethargy (four patients), dizziness with ataxia (four patients), and occasional confusion (two patients).  *eos One patient died in irreversible coma.  *eos There were also nine patients who experienced transient hypotension following drug administration.  *eos The addition of levamisole to 5-FU had no discernable impact upon toxicity except for a slight increase in leukopenia.  *eos Eight patients on this combination complained of altered taste, primarily a metallic taste in the mouth.  *eos There were three treatment-related deaths, one each on 5-FU alone, 5-FU plus thymidine, and MOF-Strept. *eos 

Therapeutic Results. *eos 

Objective response rates are shown according to regimen in Table 3.  *eos None of the combination regimens showed a significant advantage to 5-FU used alone.  *eos It is noteworthy that while the MOF-Strept regimen had the highest regression rate, it was also the regimen with the lowest proportion of patients whose disease remained stable and the highest proportion of patients in whom the best response observed was tumor regression.  *eos Whereas 5-FU plus PALA was associated with the lowest regression rate, these regressions were of the longest median duration.  *eos The intervals to disease progression are shown in Fig 1.  *eos The median interval to progression for all patients was 3/V2 months.  *eos There was no suggestion that any of the combination regimens performed in a superior fashion to 5-FU used alone, and it is unlikely that any could produce as much as a 50% increase in time to progression (P < .05) for each regimen v 5-FU alone.  *eos (These are two-sided P values obtained from a multivariate Cox analysis assessing consistency of the data with a hazard ratio of 1.5.)   *eos Table 4 shows the association of a number of patient characteristics with survival.  *eos As would be expected, both performance status and the presence of measurable disease are highly predictive.  *eos Grade of anaplasia also proved to be a powerful prognostic predictor.  *eos This factor was imbalanced among our treatment regimens, but this imbalance clearly weighed against the 5-FU arm that had the lowest proportion of low-grade lesions and the highest proportion of highly anaplastic tumors.  *eos Sex ratios and patients with metastatic disease confirmed only by chest x-ray were also imbalanced in our study, but neither were important prognostic variables. *eos 

Figure 2 displays the patient survival according to treatment regimen.  *eos The median survival for all patients was 81/4 months.  *eos None of the combination regimens showed a significant superiority to 5-FU used alone.  *eos There is no reasonable possibility that a 50% (4 month) increase in survival could be obtained for any regimen in comparison with 5-FU alone.  *eos This was confirmed by a stratified Cox analysis, adjusting for key prognostic covariates, which indicated that the data were inconsistent with any combination regimen yielding a 50% increase in survival relative to 5-FU (ie, a hazard ratio of 1 .5), wherefore 5-FU plus PALA, P < .01, 5-FU plus thymidine, P < .0001, 5-FU plus levamisole, P < .01, and MOF-Strept, P < .05. *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

The results of this study were singularly discouraging.  *eos In spite of the fact that the patients tested were in very good overall general condition with no previous chemotherapy exposure, none of our experimental regimens produced any meaningful advantage over therapy with simple 5-FU alone and none can be recommended for standard practice.   *eos In each of the regimens we tested, drug dosages and scheduling were admittedly largely arbitrary.  *eos It is entirely possible that different proportionate representation of drug dosages or different scheduling could produce more favorable or less favorable results than we observed.  *eos Unfortunately, there is little in the way of reliably predictable animal model experimentation to serve as a foundation for rational dosage regimens in humans. *eos 

In designing the 5-FU-PALA regimen, we arbitrarily elected that both agents would be given at approximately equal proportions of the tolerable dose if each drug was used alone.  *eos This allowed for 60% of the full dose of both 5-FU and PALA to be administered.  *eos The dose-limiting mucocutaneous toxicity that we observed undoubtedly represented the additive effects of both agents.  *eos Our results were disappointing.  *eos Martin has pointed out that it might be possible to obtain the full biochemical modulating effect of PALA by using a considerably lower dose of this agent, thereby allowing the 5-FU dose to be increased to near full therapeutic levels.  *eos Further exploration of the 5-FU-PALA theme might be justified on this basis. *eos 

With the 5-FU-thymidine combination, we observed a marked modulation of 5-FU effect with regard to both dose and toxicity.  *eos The total dose of 5-FU in this combination was only 12% of the dosage of 5-FU used alone that would produce a comparable degree of hematologic toxicity.  *eos Unfortunately, this modulation did not translate into the therapeutic gain predicted by animal models, and the neurotoxicity only rarely observed with 5-FU alone was made much more prominent. *eos 

Our experience with the 5-FU-levamisole combination was particularly discouraging in view of the early study of the University of Wisconsin, indicating that this combination could produce substantial survival improvement. *eos 

In agreement with the New York Memorial Group, and in contrast with the Gastrointestinal Tumor Study Group results, we did record a moderately high response rate with the MOFStrept combination.  *eos This, however, was purchased at the price of disagreeable nausea and vomiting and the additional toxic problems of thrombocytopenia.  *eos One cannot conclude that this regimen added to the quality of patient life, and since it did not add to duration of life, we must conclude that this regimen has little to recommend it. *eos 

An interesting sidelight of this study is the fact that grade of tumor anaplasia was found to be a powerful prognostic determinant, matching the more well-established performance status and presence or absence of measurable disease.  *eos The fact that all tissue was subjected to a common pathology review process may have produced sufficient uniformity of grading to allow this characteristic to be a useful predictor of survival. *eos 

Whereas the results of this study were negative, these should not discourage continued efforts to exploit the biochemical modulation approaches.  *eos We would hope this could be done more successfully with increasing knowledge of how best to apply the results of experimental models in the clinical settings. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0814</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Loco-regional and distant relapses contribute to impair theoutcome of rectal cancer patients) As to the former, eitherpre- or post-operative radiation therapy (RT) significantlyreduce loco-regional recurrence, post-operative chemotherapy(CT), alone or in different combinations with RT,is effective in improving both disease-free survival andsurvival.  *eos However, many drawbacks still exist regarding themethod of RT delivery as well as the toxicity of combinationadjuvant chemotherapy. *eos 

Purpose. *eos 

The aim of this trial is to assess the effectiveness and toxicityof adjuvant post-operative RT vs combined RT and CT(5-FU plus levamisole) in patients with TNM stage II-IIIresectable rectal cancer (pT3-4, pN0, M0, pTl-4, pNl-3,M0).  *eos The primary endpoint is overall survival, secondaryendpoints are disease-free survival, rate of loco-regionalrecurrence, and treatment-related toxicity/morbidity. *eos 

Materials and methods. *eos 

From May 1992 to December 1994, 149 patients (80 males, 69 females, age range 40-75, median 64.7 years of age) with 0-2 (ECOG) performance status (PS) were enrolled by the P.A.R.  *eos Cooperative Study Group.  *eos Protocol entry criteria are, en-bloc resection of all known tumour, a surgical specimen which must be adequate for TNM staging, pT3-4, pN0, M0 and pT 1-4, pNl-3, M0 primary rectal adenocarcinoma, microscopically negative resection margins.  *eos Patients excluded included those with recurrent cancer, or with second malignancy (except non-melanomatous skin cancer and in-situ cervical cancer), active infection, pregnant or nursing women.  *eos No prior or concurrent chemo-, immuno-, radio-, and endocrine therapy are allowed.  *eos 

As regards haematobiochemical tests, patients should have WBC count at least 4000/cmm, PLT at least 100,000/cmm, bilirubin < 1.5 x N, AP, ALT, AST < 2.5 x N, creatinine < 1.25 x N.  *eos Eligible patients are enrolled within 40 days after surgery in a multicentre randomized clinical trial with two arms, Arm I = post-operative RT, Arm II = post-operative RT and CT (5-FU plus levamisole), with stratification by participating institutions.  *eos 

Dosage schedule. *eos 

Within 42 days from surgery, patients randomized in Arm I receive RT (50 Gy) in daily fractions of 2 Gy, 5 days/wk for 5 wk, to tumour bed and loco-regional lymph-nodes (internal iliac and presacral nodes) with four portals (LL and AP).  *eos External iliac nodes are included in the radiation field if the tumour invaded bladder, prostate, cervix or vagina.  *eos Patients randomized in Arm II begin with the first cycle of 5-FU (450 mg/sqm/d iv bolus on days 1-5) plus ievamisole (150 mg/d orally on days 1-3).  *eos Post-operative RT is delivered during the next week at the same dosage and schedule as in Arm I.  *eos The other five cycles of CT (5-FU every 28 days, and levamisole every 15 days for the whole length of 5-FU administration) continue at the end of RT, provided that all clinical and haemato-biochemical parameters are within the normal range.  *eos 

Statistical and ethical considerations. *eos 

The primary end-point of the study is overall survival and the expected 5-year survival in RT-treated patients is 50%, hence, 175 patients will be enrolled in each arm to obtain 80% power of the study related to 15% increase of 5-year survival in RT+CT treated patients.  *eos According to the 'intention to treat' principle, all patients randomized will be included in the final analysis.  *eos Each patient will be informed as regards the modalities of treatment and the aim of the study, he/she will give oral or written consensus.  *eos 

Preliminary results. *eos 

No significant differences as regards sex, age, performance states, type of operation (sphincter-saving resection or abdominoperineal excision of the rectum), pT, pN stages of disease, number of sampled lymph-nodes, and grading were observed in 76 and 73 patients randomized in Arms I and II, respectively.  *eos The median randomization time occurred on the 19th post-operative day (range, 6-24 days), on average, patients began RT 43 days from surgery (range, 27-98 days).  *eos Up to now, two and seven relapses, respectively, have been observed in Arms I and II, two and three patients, respectively have died in Arms I and II.  *eos As regards toxicity, radiodermatitis (8.3%, Grade III) and diarrhoea (8.3%, Grade III) were observed in Arm I while radiodermatitis (13.6%, Grade III), diarrhoea (27.3%, Grade III, 9.1%, Grade IV), and leukopaenia (8.3%, Grade III) occurred in Arm II.  *eos Despite the short duration of the trial, these preliminary findings confirm the validity of the rationale with lower morbidity for radiotherapy alone or radiotherapy combined with chemotherapy.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0821</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
THE ANTIMETABOLITES methotrexate (MTX) and 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) have become established over the past quarter century among the most useful cancer chemotherapeutic agents.  *eos MTX has been widely used as a single agent for treatment of head and neck cancer, while 5-FU is a major drug for treatment of advanced colorectal and gastric cancer.  *eos The two drugs have been used together clinically on empirical grounds for some time, particularly in the treatment of breast cancer, but data from experimental tumors in vivo and in vitro document both synergistic and antagonistic interactions.  *eos The sequential exposure of L1210 cells to MTX and then to 5-FU was shown to increase the intracellular concentration of 5-FU ribonucleotides, a potential mechanism of synergy.  *eos However, synergy is not observed in the presence of physiologic concentrations of purines, raising doubts about its clinical relevance.  *eos Sequential administration of moderate doses of MTX followed by 5-FU has been reported effective in advanced head and neck cancer and colorectal cancer, as well as breast cancer, but the importance of the sequence remains uncertain.  *eos We therefore conducted a prospective randomized clinical trial in which sequential MTX followed by 5-FU was compared to the same drugs given in the opposite order.  *eos Since our primary objective was to compare the treatment sequences, we chose to include patients with a variety of tumors reasonably treated with either MTX or 5-FU as single agents.  *eos Our results and those of Browman et al do not support reports of superior efficacy for the sequential administration of MTX followed by 5-FU compared to other drug sequences. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos 

Patients eligible for this study had measurable or evaluable advanced or recurrent squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the head and neck,adenocarcinoma of the colon, rectum or stomach, or SCC of other primary site (Table I).  *eos Histopathologic confirmation of diagnosis.  *eos Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status of 0-2. leukocyte count >3.0 x 10/L, platelet count > 100 x 10/L and adequate renal function (scrum creatinine <90 umol/L or creatinine clearance > 1.0 mL/sec) were required.  *eos The inclusion of some patients with previously untreated stage II head and neck cancer reflected the opinion of the combined head and neck clinic that they were unsuitable for cure by surgery or radiotherapy. *eos 

Informed consent was obtained in accordance with the requirements of the institutional ethics committee.  *eos Central telephone randomization used balanced blocks stratified only by primary site to assign one of two treatment sequences, either MTX followed one hour later by 5-FU (MF). or 5-FU followed *eos 

SEQUENTIAL MTX/5-FU. *eos 

One hour later by MTX (FM).  *eos In either case, the dose of MTX was 250 mg/m2, and the dose of 5-FU was 600 mg/m2.  *eos Each drug was given by slow intravenous (IV) injection, with an infusion of one liter of saline in the hour between drugs.  *eos Patients received oral or IV bicarbonate to ensure a urine pH of at least 7.0 at the time of MTX administration and for 24 hours thereafter, then oral folinic acid rescue (FAR) for eight doses of 15 mg each 6 hours commencing 24 hours after the MTX.  *eos FAR was extended for a further 24 hours in patients who developed an increasing serum creatinine, or who experienced mucositis.  *eos Treatment was given in the outpatient department except in the immediate postoperative period or in patients judged unreliable for FAR. *eos 

After four courses at one-week intervals, response status was assessed by standard World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.  *eos Patients who showed complete or partial response received a further four courses at two-week intervals, while those with stable or progressive disease discontinued chemotherapy. *eos 

Subsequent treatment was dependent on the primary site and on prior treatment, but was defined by the protocol to be radiotherapy after completion of protocol chemotherapy in previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer. *eos 

Statistical analysis used BMDP statistical software to prepare and compare Kaplan-Meier survival curves (program BMDPIL) for the group as a whole and for subgroups by primary site, treatment sequence, performance status, sex, age group, and response to therapy.  *eos Among previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, disease stage expressed as TNM separately and as stage grouping, using standard definitions of the American Joint Committee for Cancer Staging and- End Result reporting were also examined as possible prognostic factors for response and survival.  *eos Standard WHO definitions of response categories and toxicity grades were followed.  *eos Chi square and Fisher's exact tests of the significance of differences in proportions responding to each treatment sequence were performed using standard formulas. *eos 

These univariate analyses were supplemented by stepwise Cox model multivariate survival comparison (program BMDP2L), selecting default conditions for the inclusion and exclusion of terms, and the MPLR stepping option.  *eos Variables included in the Cox models for all patients with head and neck cancer were treatment group, prior radiotherapy, performance status, sex, and prior surgery.  *eos For previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, stage was included either as stage group or as TNM stage separately. *eos 

Multivariate analysis of the proportion responding to treatment used stepwise logistic regression (program BMDPLR) with response as the dependent variable and examined treatment group, sex, and performance status.  *eos For previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, stage expressed as either stage group or as T, N, and M stage, separately and with two and three-way interactions were also included.  *eos Default conditions for the inclusion and exclusion of terms were used, and the MLR stepping option selected.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Altogether, 108 patients were entered, including 70 with head and neck cancer of whom 49 had received no prior chemotherapy, no radiotherapy, and no surgical treatment beyond diagnostic biopsy.  *eos There were 24 patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma, all with symptomatic advanced disease, and five with advanced gastric carcinoma.  *eos The remaining nine patients had metastatic or recurrent SCC of other primary site.  *eos Although the pretreatment stratification was by primary site only, a reasonable balance of prognostic factors was achieved (Table 1), but there was a trend to less favorable performance status in the group receiving 5-FU before MTX. *eos 

The treatments were well tolerated in most patients, with a low incidence of hematologic and no significant renal toxicity (Table 2), but occasional severe diarrhea or mucositis occurred, apparently despite normal renal function and FAR.  *eos Four patients, two on each treatment sequence, died of treatment-related complications (sepsis in two patients, diarrhea in one, and aspiration pneumonia in one patient), and a further patient developed prolonged neurologic toxicity with coma but recovered fully.  *eos Two patients on each treatment sequence were withdrawn from treatment because of severe but nonlethal toxicity.  *eos No significant differences in toxicity according to the treatment sequence were observed (Table 2). *eos 

Response categories and median survival durations are summarized in Table 3.  *eos Both treatment sequences were effective in head and neck cancer, producing an overall major response rate (complete and partial) of 46% of all entered patients, including 52% (95% confidence limits, 39%-65%) of evaluable patients.  *eos Responses were seen in 53% of all entered previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, including 58% (95% confidence limits, 40%-70%) of those evaluable for response.  *eos Differences in response rates between treatment sequences were not statistically significant (Table 3), but there was a consistent trend toward higher response rates in the groups receiving MF.  *eos This was most extreme among previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, of this subgroup 65% responded to the sequence of MF, while 39% of entered patients including 47% of those evaluable for response, responded to the reverse FM sequence (P = .18, Fisher's exact test).  *eos Even if the most extreme case is assumed and all four nonevaluable patients regarded as nonresponders, the difference was still not significant (P = .06, Fisher's exact test, with no allowance for multiple comparisons). *eos 

Because most responding patients with head and neck cancer received radiotherapy while still in response, no meaningful response duration could be determined, instead survival times are presented (Table 3), with a median survival of at least 13 months in all groups.  *eos Responding patients survived significantly longer than others (P < .001), but this may merely reflect an inherently superior prognosis in these patients.  *eos Patients with head and neck cancer had significantly longer survival than those with other primary sites (P < .001), reflecting the relatively earlier stage at which chemotherapy was used in head and neck cancer. *eos 

Survival duration was not significantly different by treatment sequence in univariate analyses, though the trend favored the sequence of 5-FU before MTX, in which the median survival had not been reached at 23 months, compared to a median survival of 13.3 months in the group receiving MTX before 5-FU. *eos 

Cox model multivariate analysis showed that ECOG performance status at study entry was the most significant prognostic factor for survival duration (P < .001), and that, among the 70 patients with head and neck cancer, when allowance was made for performance status, a survival difference in favor of the "reverse" FM sequence emerged (P < .025).  *eos Other factors including stage, sex, prior radiotherapy, and prior surgery were not significant.  *eos Response category was not included in this model, as it represented a consequence of therapy. *eos 

Among patients with colorectal cancer, responses were seen in 33% of all entered patients, including 40% (95% confidence limit, 19%- 64%) of those evaluable for response.  *eos The median survival of colorectal cancer patients from start of treatment was only 4.6 months.  *eos No significant sequence-dependent differences in response rate or survival duration were observed among the patients with colorectal cancer.  *eos Responses were seen among the small number of patients with other cancers (Table 3). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

Biochemical and cell culture results from this laboratory suggested that the sequence-dependent synergy observed in vitro between MTX and 5-FU was reduced in the presence of 1-3 )umol/L hypoxanthine, a physiologic level found in human plasma.  *eos This observation cast doubt on the clinical relevance of the sequence of administration of MTX and 5-FU.  *eos We therefore conducted a prospective randomized controlled trial of sequential MTX followed one hour later by 5-FU versus the same drugs administered one hour apart but in the opposite order.  *eos Because the question at issue was the sequence of drug administration rather than the study of a particular tumor type, we chose to include patients with SCCs of the head and neck, colorectal or gastric adenocarcinoma, and other SCCs reasonably treated by either MTX or 5-FU.  *eos Both treatments were effective in head and neck cancer (Table 3).  *eos Although it was not the purpose of this trial to do so, these results compare favorably with our previous experience using various doses of MTX as a single agent or combination chemotherapy including cisplatin.  *eos In the small number of patients with colorectal cancer we observed a response rate of 33% (40% of evaluable patients), a figure somewhat higher than that usually seen after 5-FU as a single agent, but the 95% confidence limits for this rate (19%-64%) emphasize that this could be a chance observation.  *eos The median survival from the start of chemotherapy was short (4.6 months) with no significant difference between the two treatment sequences in response rate or survival duration (Table 3). *eos 

The trial is continuing, and has recently been widened to include patients with advanced gastric adenocarcinoma. *eos 

We thought it important to perform this interim analysis of efficacy and toxicity in view of the theoretical possibility that the sequence of 5-FU followed by MTX might prove antagonistic.  *eos Antagonism could have provided a therapeutic advantage if it were more marked in normal tissues than in tumor, as higher doses could then have been used in the FM arm.  *eos Such a differential effect was conceivable in view of the widely differing purine concentrations in bone marrow and peripheral blood.  *eos In fact, no significant difference was observed between the toxicities of the two drug sequences (Table 2), suggesting that neither synergy nor antagonism was displayed in the effects of either sequence on normal tissues. *eos 

Since this trial was commenced, it has been suggested that the optimal time delay for sequence-dependent synergy of MTX and 5-FU in human cancer cell lines may be longer than the one hour used in the present study.  *eos This prediction is based on results obtained in tissue culture using low purine concentrations, and its relevance to effects in vivo remains uncertain. *eos 

Browman et al have conducted a similar trial in which patients with head and neck cancer were randomized to receive MTX followed one hour later by 5-FU or the same two drugs given simultaneously.  *eos They were unable to show a benefit for sequential administration, indeed, the trend in their study favored the simultaneous therapy group.  *eos To our knowledge, these are the only prospective randomized clinical trials yet reported that test the importance of the sequence of administration of 5-FU and MTX.  *eos The results do not support reports based on uncontrolled studies that sequential administration of MTX before 5-FU is important to the efficacy of this combination. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>0954</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
TRIALS of postoperative radiotherapy for breast cancer conducted during the 1960s and 1970s showed significant reductions in rates of locoregional recurrence but no improvement in overall survival.  *eos This result has been attributed to micrometastases, which determine prognosis regardless of the effect of the locoregional therapy.  *eos Additional concern was raised by data suggesting that irradiated patients have reduced survival rates, due to either immune suppression or cardiac complications.  *eos In the late 1970s, adjuvant chemotherapy became a standard treatment for high-risk premenopausal patients with breast cancer. *eos 

The use of adjuvant radiation subsequently declined, because it did not appear to prolong survival.  *eos Nevertheless, there are reasons to reconsider radiotherapy, including the limited value of adjuvant chemotherapy for bulky disease, a synergistic effect of chemotherapy plus radiation on residual locoregional tumor, and the possibility that eliminating bulky disease with radiation may improve the effect of chemotherapy, because chemotherapy may be more effective when the overall disease burden is low. *eos 

To test the hypothesis that adding radiation to adjuvant systemic therapy improves the outcome in patients with breast cancer, we designed a randomized trial in 1978 in British Columbia.  *eos This report presents our findings after 15 years of follow-up. *eos 

METHODS. *eos From 1979 through 1986, 318 premenopausal women with newly diagnosed stage I or II breast cancer were enrolled in the study after undergoing modified radical mastectomy if, after axillary-node dissection, one or more level I or II lymph nodes were found to be positive on pathological examination.  *eos The mastectomy was performed according to standard surgical practice between 1979 and 1986.  *eos After written informed consent was obtained, the patients were randomly assigned to one of two groups, those receiving adjuvant chemotherapy plus locoregional radiotherapy in five fields (the chemotherapyradiotherapy group, with 164 patients) and those receiving chemotherapy alone (the chemotherapy group, with 154 patients).  *eos The characteristics of the patients were evenly balanced, as Table 1 shows. *eos 

Surgery. *eos All the patients underwent modified radical mastectomy, with dissection of level I and II axillary lymph nodes.  *eos The surgery was performed by specialists who referred all the patients to the British Columbia Cancer Agency, the provincial cancer institute, for registration, randomization, and the planning of the chemotherapy and radiation treatments. *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos The chemotherapy consisted of cyclophosphamide (600 mg per square meter of body-surface area), methotrexate (40 mg per square meter), and fluorouracil (600 mg per square meter) (the CMF regimen), given intravenously every 21 days as described by Bonadonna et al., initially for 12 months (80 patients), and in the case of patients randomized after 1981, for 6 months. *eos 

Radiation. *eos The radiation therapy was administered between the fourth and fifth cycles of chemotherapy.  *eos Sixteen daily treatments were delivered over a period of three to four weeks.  *eos The postmastectomy chest wall received a dose of 37.5 Gy through two tangential fields.  *eos The mid-axilla received a dose of 35 Gy through an anterior supraclavicularaxillary field with a posterior axillary boost.  *eos A direct internal mammary field delivered a dose of 35 Gy at a depth of 3 cm. All the fields were treated with cobalt-60.  *eos The interval between the fourth and fifth cycles of chemotherapy was five to six weeks.  *eos Also, as part of a second randomization, 68 patients with estrogen-positive tumors were treated with radiationinduced ovarian ablation that included 20 Gy over a period of five days plus prednisone (7.5 mg per day) for two years, as described by Meakin et al. Among these 68 patients, 33 were assigned to chemotherapy and 35 were assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos In the various analyses, we studied the following end points, any relapse of breast cancer (or death without a known relapse of breast cancer), for the analysis of disease-free survival, locoregional recurrence as a first event, before a systemic recurrence (in the ipsilateral chest wall or an axillary, internal mammary, or supraclavicular node), for the analysis of survival free of locoregional disease, any systemic relapse, with or without a locoregional relapse (or death without a known systemic relapse), for the analysis of survival free of systemic disease, death from breast cancer, for the analysis of breast-cancerspecific survival, and any death, for the analysis of overall survival.  *eos Survival curves were estimated by the KaplanMeier method. *eos 

Significance levels, estimates of relative risk, and 95 percent confidence intervals were calculated with a proportional-hazards  regression model.  *eos Two-sided P values of less than 0.05 were considered to represent statistical significance.  *eos The analysis was donefor the whole group of 318 patients and also for subgroups with involvement in either one to three axillary nodes or four or more nodes.  *eos Differences between these subgroups with respect to the relative risk associated with the radiation were studied by testing for significant interactions with the proportional-hazards regression model.  *eos In the survival analysis, the time to the end points associated with each event was calculated from the date of the tissue diagnosis of breast cancer.  *eos Eleven patients (3.5 percent) were lost to follow-up  three (1.9 percent) from the chemotherapy group and eight (4.9 percent) from the chemotherapyradiotherapy group.  *eos All 11  patients were alive and had no recurrences at their last known follow-up.  *eos In all the analyses, the data were censored as of the date of that follow-up.  *eos Of the 164 patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 12 did not receive radiotherapy and were treated with chemotherapy alone (7 declined radiotherapy, 3 had metastases before radiotherapy, and 2 had postsurgical complications).  *eos Eight patients randomly assigned to chemotherapy had radiotherapy at their own request or that of their physicians.  *eos All the analyses presented were performed on an intention-to-treat basis (according to the initial randomization). *eos 

RESULTS. *eos All Patients. *eos A total of 318 patients were randomized, and among the survivors the median follow-up was 150 months (150 months in the chemotherapy group and 150 in the chemotherapyradiotherapy group).  *eos During the 15 years of follow-up, breast cancer had recurred in 176 patients and 144 patients died.  *eos Of the 176 patients with recurrences, the disease returned locoregionally as a first event in 55 and systemically in 169, 14 additional patients had locoregional recurrences after a systemic recurrence.  *eos There was no difference with regard to any survival end point between the patients who had 12 months of chemotherapy and those who had only 6 months P 0.60 for disease-free survival at 15 years, P 0.70 for overall survival). *eos 

Study Groups. *eos Table 2 and Figures 1 through 4 show the results in the two groups of patients.  *eos In the group treated with chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, 79 of 164 patients had recurrences  locoregional, systemic, or both  as compared with 97 of 154 patients in the group given chemotherapy alone.  *eos These values translate into an overall reduction of 33 percent in the rate of recurrence of breast cancer (relative risk, 0.67, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.50 to 0.90, P 0.007), with an improvement of 17 percentage points in disease-free survival at the 15-year followup (Fig. 1).  *eos There was an overall reduction of 34 percent in the rate of systemic recurrence (relative risk, 0.66, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.49 to 0.89, P 0.006) in the group treated with combined therapy (75 of 164 patients vs. 94 of 154 patients in the group treated only with chemotherapy), and a 17-percentage-point improvement in systemic disease-free survival (Fig. 2).  *eos The rate of locoregional recurrence was reduced by 56 percent (relative risk, 0.44, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.26 to 0.77, P 0.003) in the group given chemotherapy plus radiotherapy (19 events, vs. 36 events in the group treated with chemotherapy only), for an absolute improvement of 20 percent in survival free of local disease.  *eos Mortality from breast cancer was reduced by 29 percent in the chemotherapyradiotherapy group (relative risk, 0.71, 95 percent confidence interval,0.51 to 0.99, P 0.05), with 62 deaths, as compared with 76 in the chemotherapy-only group, which represented an improvement of 10 percentage points in breast-cancerspecific survival (Fig. 3).  *eos There were 66 deaths in the group given the combined treatment and 78 deaths in the chemotherapy group, for a 26 percent reduction in overall mortality at 15 years (relative risk, 0.74, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.53 to 1.02, P 0.07) and an 8 percent improvement in overall survival (Table 2 and Fig. 4).  *eos Among the 94 patients who had systemic relapses after chemotherapy alone, 19 were alive at the time of the 15-year analysis, as compared with 9 of the 75 patients with such relapses in the chemotherapyradiotherapy group.  *eos Radiation also improved outcome in the 68 patients randomly assigned to ovarian ablation, in regard to disease-free survival (relative risk, 0.72), survival free of systemic disease (relative risk, 0.76), and overall survival (relative risk, 0.88). *eos 

Subgroups Based on Nodal Involvement. *eos The reduction in the relative risk of a recurrence that was obtained by adding radiation to chemotherapy was similar in the subgroup with one to three positive nodes and the subgroup with four or more positive nodes (Table 3).  *eos There were no statistically significant differences between these subgroups with regard to either survival free of systemic disease (P for interaction 0.9) or rates of locoregional recurrence (P 0.73). *eos 

Side Effects of Radiation. *eos Arm edema developed in 15 of the 154 irradiated patients.  *eos Interventions were required in six (an elastic sleeve in four, a pump in one, and physiotherapy in one), as compared with five patients in the chemotherapy group, one of whom required physiotherapy.  *eos Limited apical lung fibrosis developed in most of the irradiated patients, but only one had interstitial pneumonitis requiring corticosteroids, with full resolution on chest radiography several weeks later.  *eos In one patient with a right-sided breast lesion,congestive heart failure developed 14 years after radiotherapy, at the age of 63.  *eos We considered this event related not to the adjuvant radiation but rather to treatment with doxorubicin, which was given at a cumulative dose of 540 mg for metastases to the lung and pleura.  *eos There were no cases of brachial plexopathy.  *eos The incidence of second cancers and the associated mortality were distributed evenly between the two groups (Table 4). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos This study of premenopausal women with breast cancer demonstrates that locoregional radiotherapy reduces the rates of locoregional and systemic relapses and the chance of dying from breast cancer.  *eos There was no excess mortality we could attribute to the long-term side effects of radiotherapy.  *eos Our trial did not stratify the patients according to nodal status, but a test for interaction showed no significant difference in the magnitude of the benefit from radiotherapy between the subgroup with three or fewer positive nodes and the subgroup with four or more positive nodes.  *eos These data based on a 15-year follow-up indicate that radiation can offer substantialprotection from systemic relapse to node-positive patients.  *eos It is possible that we will see additional benefit in overall survival, because at this writing 19 patients in the chemotherapy group remain alive with systemic recurrence, as compared with only 9 in the combined-treatment group, most of these 28 patients are expected to die of breast cancer.  *eos The benefits of radiotherapy found in our study, but not in most earlier studies, merit comment.  *eos The meta-analysis performed by the Early Breast Cancer Trialists Collaborative Group,1 which analyzed all the randomized radiation trials begun before 1985, found a 67 percent reduction in rates of locoregional relapse (P 0.001) and a 6 percent reduction in mortality from breast cancer (P 0.03), but no improvement in overall survival.  *eos There was an important increase in the number of deaths not due to breast cancer among the irradiated patients (P 0.002).  *eos A previous meta-analysis and several individual trials found that the latter was due to a substantial increase in mortality from cardiac causes.  *eos These studies, however, included all the radiation trials started in the 1960s, using older equipment and radiation techniques and considered obsolete by present standards.  *eos Also, in various past trials different areas were encompassed in the irradiated volume, and the trials differed in techniques of radiation, treatment planning, age, nodal status, and the use of adjuvant chemotherapy.  *eos Therefore, the metaanalyses of previous studies may not be relevant to current practice. *eos 

There are at least nine reported randomized trials comparing the combined treatment with chemotherapy alone.  *eos Of these, only the Danish study found that radiotherapy had a benefit of a magnitude similar to that in our trial, and there was a significant survival benefit in favor of radiotherapy (P 0.001).  *eos The patients in that study were similar to those in our cohort, there was a large and homogeneous group of premenopausal, node-positive patients treated with chemotherapy and five-field radiotherapy.  *eos The other eight studies were notsimilar to ours or the Danish trial, either because the number of randomized premenopausal patients was small or because the radiotherapy techniques or the chemotherapy schedules were heterogeneous.  *eos Our data suggest that locoregional disease is not only a marker of systemic disease but also, in some patients, a potential source for its future dissemination.  *eos The Stockholm trial also provides evidence that locoregional radiotherapy in node-positive patients decreases the risk of systemic metastases.  *eos In this context, the interaction with adjuvant chemotherapy may be important, because chemotherapy is expected to eliminate systemic micrometastases more effectively than locoregional disease.  *eos In node-positive patients, adding locoregional radiotherapy may be essential to prevent secondary dissemination from the residual locoregional metastatic disease, and it could increase the potential for cure. *eos 

Because all our patients were uniformly treated with chest-wall and nodal radiation, our results may not apply to patients treated with breast irradiation alone after conservative surgery.  *eos Four randomized trials comparing breast irradiation with no irradiation in patients who underwent conservative surgery showed significant reductions in the rate of relapse in the breast but no effect on systemic recurrences or overall survival.  *eos Therefore, it may be necessary to add nodal radiation to breast irradiation in premenopausal node-positive patients who are treated with partial mastectomy and adjuvant chemotherapy.  *eos Locoregional radiation is not routinely used atpresent in patients with node-positive breast cancer, although it is coming into use to treat patients with 10 or more positive nodes and occasionally those with 4 or more positive nodes.  *eos The routine use of radiation in all node-positive patients would represent a substantial shift in treatment for breast cancer.  *eos Our data indicate that locoregional disease remaining after definitive surgery may be an important source of systemic disease.  *eos The elimination of locoregional cancer cells by radiotherapy added to adjuvant chemotherapy may reduce mortality in selected patients with breast cancer. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1001</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Purpose, As previously shown, antibody treatment increased survival of patients with resected colorectal cancer of stage Dukes' C.  *eos Since the 5-year analysis was criticized because of the wide range (2.7 to 7.5 years) of follow-up time, we performed a 7-year analysis with only four of 189 patients monitored for less than 5 years.  *eos Patients and Methods, A total of 189 patients with resected Dukes' C colorectal cancer were randomly allocated to infusions of a total of 900 mg 17-1A antibody, 500 mg postoperatively followed by 4 monthly doses of 100 mg (n = 99), or to observation only (n = 90).  *eos Primary end points were overall survival and disease-free interval.  *eos Patients were stratified by a dynamic randomization according to center, sex, location of tumor, number of affected lymph nodes, and preoperative carcinoembryonic antigen concentration.  *eos Results, Randomization produced balanced distribution of risk factors.  *eos After 7 years of follow-up evaluation, treatment had reduced overall mortality by 32% (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .01, log-rank, P = .01) and decreased the recurrence rate by 23% (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .04, log-rank, P = .07).  *eos The intentionto-treat analysis gave a significant effect for overall survival (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .01, log-rank, P = .02) and disease-free survival (Cox's proportional hazard, P = .02, log-rank, P = .1 1).  *eos While distant metastases were significantly reduced (Cox's proportional hazard, P = .004, log-rank, P = .004), local relapses were not (Cox's proportional hazard, P = .65, log-rank, P = .52).  *eos This differential effect of 17-1A antibody on disseminated isolated tumor cells versus occult local satellites may explain the increased significance seen in the overall survival.  *eos Conclusion, The now-matured study shows that 17-1A antibody administered after surgery prevents the development of distant metastasis in approximately one third of patients.  *eos The therapeutic effect is maintained after 7 years of follow-up evaluation. *eos 

THE CURRENT PESSIMISTIC VIEW of unconjugated monoclonal antibodies as cancer therapeutics has been largely influenced by the negative outcome of multiple clinical trials initiated shortly after introduction of the hybridoma technology.  *eos Thus, it comes as no surprise that recent reports on some successes obtained with antibody therapy in lymphoma, breast, and colorectal carcinoma were met with great reserve.  *eos Wondering what the characteristic features of these trials were, one notes that two of these trials, one in lymphoma and one in breast carcinoma, 2 had been performed with engineered antibodies, ie, either human/ murine chimeric or human complementanly defining regious (CDR)-grafted mmunoglobulins respectively, while the third stands out because of the target and end point used.  *eos In contrast to other trials aimed at patients with larger metastatic tumor masses and using regression or shrinkage as the end point, this one on colorectal cancer of stage Dukes' C required microscopically complete resection of the primary tumor for patients to be admitted.3 As the primary end point, overall-survival was determined at 5 years.  *eos Here, we report on the 7-year follow-up study of this prospective randomized two-arm trial in minimal residual disease that used the murine 17-1A antibody, 4 which recognizes a 34-kd glycoprotein of the cell membrane of epithelial cells.5 The 5-year analysis had shown that a short, albeit intensive, postoperative course of antibody treatment (900 mg total dose) significantly reduced the appearance of distant metastases, but did not affect the rate of local relapses.  *eos However, local metastases may not be as innocuous as generally thought.  *eos As recently shown for breast carcinoma, without regional radiation therapy, occult local metastases can give rise to distant metastases after many years and thus affect long-term survival. 6 ,7 Therefore, with no effect of antibody therapy on the local relapse at 5 years, It was of interest to know how the overall survival evolved at the 7-year follow-up evaluation.  *eos This analysis also invalidated objections concerned about the maturity of the reported 5-year follow-up study.  *eos Now, after a median observation time of 7 years, with only four of 185 patients monitored for less than 5 years, the study has matured and continues to demonstrate a significant benefit with regard to survival.  *eos 

PATIENTS AND METHODS. *eos Patient Selection and Surgery. *eos The multicenter study consisted of six academic centers in former West Germany A total of 189 patients were randomized, with the first patient entered in May 1985 and the last in Apnl 1990 The study was closed in December 1992, and we present here the final status with median follow-up data of 7 years Eligible patients were required to have histologically confirmed adenocarcmoma of colon or the rectum with spread to regional lymph nodes (Dukes' C or International Unimon Agamst Cancer [UICC] stage III) In addition, hlstopathologic confirmation of curative resection (R0) was secured Radical tumor resection was performed by a standardized technique agreed upon by all participating centers When located within 15 cm of the anal verge, a tumor was classified as rectal carcinoma Patients were less than 70 years old and had a Karnofsky index greater than 50% Eleven of 99 patients randomized to treatment refused their treatment assignment, but were otherwise considered eligible for the study.  *eos According to Zelen, these patients were included in the treatment group for final analysis, although they had not received antibodies. *eos 

Stratification and Randomization. *eos After confirmation of histology and R0 resection of lymph node metastasis, patients were randomized into two groups one received 17-lA treatment, whereas the other served as observation controls.  *eos All patients were stratified according to Zelen 8 by the following factors participating center, sex, location of tumor, stage (Dukes' Cl or C2 equivalent to pN1 or pN2-3), number of affected lymph nodes, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level before surgery (Table 1) In the treated arm, more patients had pT2 and pT3 tumors, and fewer had pT4 tumors However, treated patients appeared to have had higher numbers of involved lymph nodes (pN2) and tumors of less differentiated histology (grade 3).  *eos However, a Fishers' exact test, companng the distnbutlon of patients according to all prognostic variables, showed no significant differences Randomlzation before consent was performed and evaluated according to Zelen 9 On approval by legal experts in 1985, this procedure was accepted by the ethical review board Statistical analyses were performed according to SAS (Statistical Analysis System, Cary, NC) To test for potential selection bias in the study, a retrospective analysis was performed at Medizimnische Hochschule Hannover on 67 Dukes' C colorectal cancer patients selected from 107 patients seen between 1980 and 1985 They fulfilled the entry criteria for the 17-1A clinical trial and were monitored for at least 5 years each The survival analysis was performed by the Instutut fur Medlzinische Informatlk und Blomathematlk, Umversltat Essen The overall survival according to Kaplan-Meier curve is nearly identical to the control group of the 17-1A trial (log-rank, P = 97), thus, this historical control does not show any selection bias. *eos 

The first 5-year analysis of the study performed by the Essen biometrical center was confirmed by two independent external audits, both of which relied on examination of original representative record samples. *eos 

Protocol Management. *eos Protocol management has been described in detail previously.  *eos The study performance and protocol adherence was overseen by the trial's blometncal center located at the University of Essen.  *eos In brief, patients were staged after surgery and had a chest radiogram and abdominal ultrasound or computed tomography scan.  *eos Patients in both groups were monitored in exactly the same way, with 14 prospectively defined follow-up visits, first on a quarterly and later on a half-year basis Follow-up evaluation continued beyond 5 years at yearly time points, but without formal protocol requirements.  *eos For the end point analysis, standardized and objectively verifiable dates were used for all patients, e, time point of surgery up to death of all cause or date of last contact alive for overall survival analysis In a separate analysis, cancer-related mortality was assessed, e, death without recurrence was not counted as an event.  *eos 

A documented histologic or radiologic diagnosis of disease was  required to confirm local or distant recurrence, whereas abnormal CEA values were not used as evidence of relapse.  *eos Recurrence was defined as time from date of surgery to date of first objective evidence of an abnormal diagnostic finding. *eos 

Antibody and Antigen. *eos The 17-1A antibody, a munne monoclonal mmunoglobulin IgG2a antibody, orginally described by Herlyn has a distinct antitumor effect on human xenografted tumors in a nude mouse model Clnical-grade antibody was purchased from the Wistar Institute (Philadelphia, PA), with support by the German Cancer Aid (Bonn, Germany).  *eos During the last phase of the study, 17-IA antibody was provided by Centocor (Leiden, the Netherlands).  *eos Recent data on cell lines transfected with 17-1A cDNA suggest that the antigen s involved in cell-cell adhesion.  *eos Therefore, it is now named eplthehal cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM). *eos 

Patients and Causes of Ineligibility. *eos Patient characteristics and distribution of risk factors for both groups were well balanced (Table 1) 3 A total of 189 patients were randomized between May 1985 and April 1990.  *eos Four patients, two in each group (2.1%), were lost to follow-up evaluation from the start and have not been included in the trial.  *eos It could be verified that neither of the two patients randomized to treatment had actually receivedthe antibody.  *eos Some patients have now been monitored for 10 years and only five patients were observed for a period of less than 5 years, with a range of 3.5 to 4.5 years.  *eos The presented 7-year follow-up data may therefore be considered mature and final.  *eos A final status of 185 patients could be obtained for this analysis.  *eos Nineteen patients (10.3%) were ineligible, seven in the treatment arm and 12 in theobservation arm.  *eos The main cause of ineligibihty (12 cases) was erroneous staging.  *eos Thus, eight patients had Dukes' B, four had Dukes' D, three were older than 70 years, one presented with polyposis coh, and one patient had residual tumor (R2) after surgery.  *eos One patient had a competing neoplasm and one patient received postoperative radiochemotherapy.  *eos Since ineligibility was not biased by treatment assignment, these patients were excluded from further analysis.  *eos However, eleven patients who refused their treatment assignment were considered eligible and were included in all statistical analyses as participants in the treatment group. *eos 

Survival. *eos After 7 years, a total of 87 deaths were observed in 166 eligible patients.  *eos Since the 5-year follow-up evaluation, four additional deaths occurred m the treated group and nine additional deaths in the control group.  *eos The death rate of the observed group was 63% (48 of 76, 95% CI, range, 48 to 78) of patients and that of the treated group was 43% (39 of 90, 95% CI, range, 31 to 58).  *eos Thus, treatment with antibody led to a relative reduction of mortality by 32% (hazards ratio, 0.57, 95% confidence interval, 8% to 51%).  *eos The KaplanMeier survival curves (Fig 1A) showed a significant benefit for patients who received antibody over those who did not receive treatment (P < .01 with Cox's proportional hazard model corrected for influence of prognostic variables, and P = .01 with log-rank test for the univariate analysis).  *eos Also, the intention-to-treat analysis (Fig B) on all 185 patients showed a significant overall benefit for the treated group (P < .01 with Cox's multivariate analysis, and P = .02 with log-rank test for the univanate analysis).  *eos Among all deaths recorded, six patients died without recurrence or secondary colorectal cancer and one observed patient of the control group died of secondary colon carcinoma, which was not counted as a recurrence.  *eos When cancer-related mortality was assessed, ie, death without recurrence was not counted as event, the benefit of treatment remained significant at P < .01 by Cox's multivariate analysis and P = .01 by log-rank test for the univariate analysis.  *eos The median survival time before death after recurrence was 1.4 years for patients randomized to treatment with 17-1A and 1.2 years for patients in the observed group.  *eos 

Recurrence.  *eos According to the disease-free interval analysis, tumor recurred in 96 of 166 eligible patients after 7 years of follow-up evaluation, thus, three more recurrences were recorded m the treatment group and one more in the observation arm.  *eos The calculated recurrence rate was 68% (49 of 76, 95% CI, range, 53 to 82) m the control group and 52% (47 of 90, 95% CI, range, 39 to 67) in the 17-1A group.  *eos The reduction in recurrence was 23% (hazards ratio, 0.66, 95% confidence interval, 1% to 43%) Recurrence-free intervals were plotted according to Kaplan-Maier (Fig 2).  *eos Antibody treatment increased time to recurrence (P = .04 with Cox proportional hazards model corrected for influence of prognostic variables, and P = .07 with log-rank test for umvanate analysis).  *eos In this analysis, data on patients who died without recurrence were censored.  *eos However, when death without recurrence was considered an event (recurrence-free survival), again a significant treatment advantage with 17-1A over control was obtained (P = .03 with Cox multivariate, and P = .05 with log-rank test for the umvariate analysis).  *eos When the analyses of recurrence-free interval and recurrence-free survival were performed including all randomized patients, ie, according to intention-to-treat, 17-1A treatment again led to significant advantage over the untreated group (Cox multivanate, P = .02, log-rank, P = .01, respectively).  *eos In summary, 46% of patients (41 of 90) in the treatment group are at nsk at 7 years and only 29% of patients (22 of 76) m the observed group are alive without recurrence.  *eos 

Pattern of Recurrence.  *eos As most of the relapse events occur in the first 2 years after resection, it is not surprising that the pattern of relapses did not show gross changes during the sixth and seventh years.  *eos When the two groups were compared with regard to the site of first recurrence, the 7-year data similar to the 5-year analysis show that significantly fewer distant recurrences occur in patients treated with the antibody than in the control arm (Fig 3).  *eos Therefore, the proposition is holding up that treatment with 17-1A may preferentially act on isolated tumor cells and thus prevent outgrowth of distant metastases.  *eos However, local relapses that occurred as the first sign of progressive disease (Fig 4) were not reduced (P = .86 with Cox multivanate analysis).  *eos As shown in Table 2, there is an excess of local recurrences in the treatment group, which may partially be explained by the longer survival of treated patients.  *eos Another reason for this difference may be local radiation applied to rectum carcinoma patients in the control group, as detailed further later.  *eos 

Toxicity. *eos The rather mild toxicity of 17-1A antibody has been described in detail in the 5-year report.  *eos Since only acute and no chronic adverse effects were seen, the toxicity profile was not changed during the last observation penod.  *eos There were no late treatment-related fatalities or life-threatening conditions, or any evidence for chronic drug-related side effects. *eos 

Immune Response to 17-1A Antibody.  *eos When tested for antibody response against murine antibody (HAMA), 80% of treated patients developed a distinct HAMA response after the second or third nfusion.  *eos Patients who developed recurrences and those who remained tumorfree did not show a difference in antibody titers.  *eos The kinetics of the HAMA response in the two subgroups have been described in the 5-year report.  *eos In brief, after the first two infusions, antibody titers were low and reached their maximum only after a fifth nfusion at 18 to 20 weeks after surgery, but remained detectable for 2 more years.  *eos As will be reported elsewhere, the serum levels of antiidlotyplc antibodies (Ab2) showed no significant differences between the analyzed patients who remained tumor free (n = 30) or experienced a relapse (n = 30).  *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos As the 7-year median follow-up data confirm the previously reported 5-year findings, the conclusion seems warranted that antibody treatment improves the chances of curatively operated patients.  *eos In the univariate and multivanate analyses, the P values for overall survival are statistically significant for the eligible as well as intention-to-treat cohort.  *eos Also, the hazards ratios of the 7-year analysis support the 5-year data.  *eos Similarly, the rates of reduction in mortality and recurrence, 32% and 23%, respectively, are in alignment with the 5-year results.  *eos The conclusion seems warranted that some of the treated patients, who have not yet recurred, may indeed be cured.  *eos The conspicuous inefficacy of the antibody on local recurrences (Fig 4) may account for the smaller P values in the disease-free-interval analysis.  *eos Local recurrences may not affect the overall survival curve to the same degree as distant metastases do (Fig 3), therefore, survival at 7 years appears to be superior to the disease-free interval.  *eos Also, the less significant umvariate analyses may well be explained by the large treatment effect, which we expected at the onset of the trial in 1985, when we hoped for an absolute reduction of events from 50% to 30%, ie, a 40% relative reduction.  *eos The observed reduction of approximately 30% is clearly lower than expected, but still in the order of that obtained by Moertel et al and Krook et al after a similar follow-up period. *eos 

In the antibody trial, both colon and rectum cancer patients were enrolled onto the trial presented here.  *eos Radiation therapy now accepted as efficient to reduce local recurrences was not part of our clhmcal protocol, but was allowed for patients in the control group.  *eos Thus, irradiation was applied to 11 patients of this group (two received preoperative, four preoperative radiation and postoperative radiochemotherapy, and five postoperative radiation only).  *eos Since these forms of therapy were administered only to the control group, a bias may have been introduced that influenced the outcome against the antibody treatment, which explains the apparent difference seen m the local recurrence rate (Table 2). *eos 

It is noteworthy that in various reports, results recorded after a 5-year observation period do not necessarily hold up when patients are monitored for an additional time of 2 years.  *eos For example, the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) conducted a study from 1977 to 1983 to compare a combination regimen that consisted of semustmine, folic acid, and fluorouracil with bacillus Calmette-Guerin.  *eos While after 5 years of follow-up evaluation, a significant increase in disease-free and overall survival ofpatients was evident, after 2 further years, the overall survival did not show significance.  *eos These findings were confirmed by another cooperative group.  *eos 

The pattern of first recurrences beyond 5 postoperative years shows that patients in each group still recur, withmanifest distant metastasis as first sign of a relapse.  *eos This finding lends some support to the concept of long-lasting dormancy in early disseminated tumor cells.  *eos Indeed, nuclear proliferation markers such as Ki-67 or p120 nucleolar antigen were rarely detected on micrometastatic cells disseminated to bone marrow.  *eos 

Patients in the control group continued to die of progressive disease that probably had arisen from occult distant metastatic cells that were elimnated by the antibody in the treatment group.  *eos However, this argument rests on the assumption that the antibody exerts its antitumor effect by mobilization of direct effector mechanisms that are active only as long as the antibody is bound to the target.  *eos Interestingly, in the most recent report (median follow-up time, 6.5 years), adjuvant therapy with fluorouracil plus levamisol administered to patients with Dukes' C colon cancer had only a minimal effect on local recurrences.  *eos In that trial, only colon cancer patients were treated who were known to have fewer local relapses than rectum cancer patients and were included in our trial.  *eos Therefore, the less pronounced chemotherapeutic effect on local relapses may be due to the difference in patient populations. *eos 

The dose of antibody chosen deserves a special comment.  *eos In the planning stage of the trial, we were afraid of a strong anaphylactic response to repeated adnumstration of murine immunoglobulin.  *eos We therefore resorted to a large, first intravenous dose that consisted of 500 mg highly soluble monomeric mmunoglobulin G2a to induce tolerance to mouse mmunoglobulin G.  *eos This strategy, originally pro1 7 posed by Sears et al, was only partially successful, as only about 20% of the recipients did not respond to mouse immunoglobulin, while the others exhibited a distinct, albeit slow rise of HAMA titers.  *eos Nevertheless, the high dose may have been critical to obtain a steep transvascular concentration gradient required for tissue penetration.  *eos Similar high doses were used in the lymphoma trial cited earlier.  *eos 

In view of the still viable hypothesis that antibody induced tumor regression is brought about by antiidiotypemediated immunization, we analyzed retrospectively HAMA positive sera.  *eos Antildiotype antibodies were detected in most HAMA-posltive samples.  *eos However, patients with and without manifest metastatic relapses did not differ in antiidiotype titers. 18 To detect ab3 antibodies, we applied a sensitive enzyme-linked mmunoadsorbent assay (ELISA), which allowed us to determine human 17-1A autoantibody.  *eos Thus far, this assay has been negative.  *eos However, it may be insufficient to determine only a humoral antiidiotype response.  *eos Indeed, recent data presented by Fagerberg et all9 indicate that also antiidlotype-specific T cells are induced by treatment with 17-1 A antibody.  *eos Thus far, in murine systems, breaking of tolerance against autoantigens via the antildotype route has not yet been shown in an unambiguous fashion. *eos 

Why only one third of the patients at risk have responded to the antibody treatment may be explained by variations in accessibility, vulnerability, and/or antigen expression in individual disseminated tumor cells.  *eos Immunohistochemical staining of the primary tumor had shown that the antigen is expressed by most, but not all cells within an individual tumor.  *eos By double staining of individual metastatic cells in bone marrow, It was shown that the 17-lA target is expressed by disseminated cells in only two thirds of the examined patients.   *eos It is safe to assume that antigenic heterogeneity, a likely consequence of the marked genomic instability of human epithelial tumors, will be a major obstacle for single-antibody treatments, as well as for any other form of monotherapy.  *eos 

Therefore, in anticipation of antigenic heterogeneity, a combination therapy that consists of antibodies of different specificities may forestall a selection of antigen-negative cells exerted inevitably by a one-antibody approach.  *eos Furthermore, humanized antibodies or entirely human antibodies generated from human mmunoglobulin gene hbrarles that are less Immunogenic than murine antibodies are now being tested.  *eos They do not only possess extended serum half-lives, but also harness human effector mechanisms much more efficiently than murine immunoglobulihns can do.  *eos On the other hand, the peculiar immunogenicity of the murine antibody may be important for the recruitment of human T cells as mediators of an indirect antitumor effect.  *eos Direct tumoricidal effects are good candidates for the still controversial reaction mechanism of unconjugated antibodies.  *eos This view is supported by the immediate gastrointestinal toxicity, such as abdominal cramps, nausea, and transient diarrhea, observed in a substantial proportion of patients shortly after infusion of the antibody.  *eos These reactions are best explained by cytotoxic effects of the antibody on normal epithelial cells that bear the 17-1A antigen to a similar degree as tumor cells.  *eos Although we still think that normal epithelial cells of the intestinal mucosa are less accessible for immunoglobulin G and its effector mechanisms than for locally produced immunoglobulin A.  *eos The discovery of the adhesion function of the 17-1A molecule,hence the new name EpCAM, raised the speculation that the antibody inhibited outgrowth of metastasis by interference with cell-cell adhesion.  *eos In other studies that also targeted a monoclonal antibody to an organ-specific, rather than a tumor-specific antigen, the tumor-specific biologic action induced by the applied antibody had been ascribed to the faster elimination of the bound antibody from normal than from malignant cells.  *eos 

For the immediate future, adding antibody to chemotherapy seems logical to attack both dormant, as well as proliferating, metastatic tumor cells.  *eos Two major trials using the 17-1A antibody with the same dose and similar regimen are currently under way to test this question in colon cancer patients.  *eos One of these trials, performed in Europe and Israel, includes a confirmatory arm with antibody as single treatment, with the other two arms applying chemotherapy or chemotherapy plus antibody, respectively.  *eos A pilot trial had shown that fluorouracil with folic acid overlapping with the three last infusions of the antibody regimen did increase overall toxicity.  *eos 

In conclusion, the presented results still support the original hypothesis that minimal residual disease occurring so frequently in patients with sohd tumors appears to be an indication for antibody therapy. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1108</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
THE American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics define stage IB cervical cancer as invasive cancer that is confined to the cervix, with a depth of more than 5 mm and a width of more than 7 mm. In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers, local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers, whether treated by surgery or irradiation.  *eos The optimal treatment of large stage IB cervical cancer has been a source of controversy since the late 1960s. *eos 

In a previous randomized trial of combined external and intracavitary irradiation alone or followed by extrafascial hysterectomy, the Gynecologic Oncology Group found that hysterectomy did not improve survival, but it did significantly reduce the rate of relapse in the pelvic region (unpublished data).  *eos Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy results in faster and more complete responses and better survival than expected with radiotherapy alone. *eos 

We elected to test this combination in a phase 3 trial to determine whether concurrent weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy would improve progression-free survival and survival in women with large bulky, or barrel-shaped, stage IB cervical cancers. *eos 

METHODS. *eos Patients. *eos Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix of stage IB (exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors with a minimal diameter of 4 cm) were eligible for the study.  *eos Inaddition, patients could have no radiographic evidence of lymphadenopathy on computed tomographic scanning or lymphangiography, and in those with enlarged or suspicious-appearing lymph nodes, no evidence of cancer on fine-needle aspiration or histologic evaluation.  *eos Extraperitoneal surgical staging of lymph nodes was optional.  *eos Patients with histologic evidence of lymph-node involvementwere not eligible, nor were those who had previously received radiotherapy or chemotherapy or those with a history of cancer other than nonmelanoma skin cancer.  *eos 

All patients were required to have a Gynecologic Oncology Group performance status of 0, 1, 2, or 3 (equivalent to Karnofsky performance scores of 90 or 100, 70 or 80, 50 or 60, and 30 or 40, respectively) and adequate bone marrow, renal function, and hepatic function.  *eos Patients were excluded from the study if they were thought to be unable to complete the planned course of therapy or the follow-up evaluations.  *eos In addition, patients had to be medically suitable for hysterectomy.  *eos The institutions that participated in the study are listed in the Appendix.  *eos Written informed consent was obtained before entry into the study, fulfilling all institutional, state, and federal regulations. *eos 

Radiotherapy. *eos All patients were scheduled to undergo external irradiation, intracavitary brachytherapy, and extrafascial hysterectomy, with half the patients randomly assigned to receive weekly intravenous infusions of cisplatin during the period of radiotherapy.  *eos The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both groups.  *eos Pelvic radiation was delivered with the four-field technique with x-ray accelerators of at least 4-MV photons at a distance of at least 100 cm. The treatment field was set to extend 3 cm beyond the known extent of disease and to encompass iliac and lower common iliac lymph nodes.  *eos Fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy were delivered 5 days a week over a period of 4 1/2 to 5 weeks, for a total dose of 45 Gy.  *eos External irradiation was withheld if the white-cell count fell below 1000 per cubic millimeter and was resumed once the count rose above that level.  *eos Low-dose brachytherapy was performed in one or two intracavitary applications after the completion of pelvic radiotherapy.  *eos Standard FletcherSuit or Henschke applicators were used.  *eos The dose to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cm superior to the cervical os) was 30 Gy, for a cumulative dose of 75 Gy, and the cumulative dose to point B (the pelvic wall) was 55 Gy. *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos Cisplatin was given intravenously once a week at a dose of 40 mg per square meter of body-surface area, with the total dose not to exceed 70 mg per week.  *eos A maximum of six doses of cisplatin was given.  *eos The final dose could be given during a patients hospitalization for intracavitary brachytherapy.  *eos Treatment with cisplatin was withheld if the total white-cell count fell below 3000 per cubic millimeter or if creatinine clearance fell below 50 ml per minute. *eos 

Hysterectomy. *eos Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed three to six weeks after the completion of radiotherapy.  *eos The corpus and cervix were removed but not contiguous parametrial tissue.  *eos The uterine vessels were transected at the uterine wall medial to the ureters, which were not unroofed.  *eos No vaginal cuff was removed.  *eos 

Quality Control and Follow-up. *eos Patients medical records, films, and pathology slides were reviewed by the appropriate Gynecologic Oncology Group committees.  *eos The Radiological Physics Center in Houston coordinated the reviews of radiotherapy.  *eos Patients were evaluated every three months for the first two years and then semiannually for three additional years.  *eos Adverse effects were reported in accordance with the Gynecologic Oncology Group criteria. *eos 

Outcome. *eos The primary end points were progression-free survival and survival.  *eos Progression-free survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of disease recurrence, death, or the last follow-up visit.  *eos Survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit.  *eos Recurrences were classified as local if they were detected in the pelvis, cervix, or vagina and as distant if they were detected in extrapelvic locations.  *eos The hysterectomy specimens were evaluated for evidence of cancer. *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos We estimated that 173 patients were needed in each treatment group in order to be able to detect a 40 percent decrease in the recurrence rate in the group given radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  *eos The design called for a final analysis when 56 events (recurrences or deaths) had occurred in patients receiving the control regimen (radiotherapy alone) and provided the study with a statistical power of 80 percent with use of the log-rank test and a one-sided significance level of 0.05. *eos 

At the time of this analysis, 69 patients in the group receiving the control regimen had had a recurrence of disease and 49 had died  88 percent of the number of deaths needed for a final analysis of survival.  *eos Therefore, because of the large difference in outcome between the two groups and the similarity in the rates of progression-free survival and survival within each group, this analysis is the final analysis of survival. *eos 

Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement, the treatment assignments were stratified according to center and to whether para-aortic lymph nodes were evaluated surgically, with approximately equal numbers of patients assigned to each group.  *eos Life-table estimates were calculated according to the method of Kaplan and Meier. *eos 

The difference between groups in survival and progression-free survival was evaluated with use of the logrank test according to the intention-to-treat principle.  *eos The Cox model was used to evaluate the difference between treatment regimens, adjust for prognostic factors, and estimate the relative likelihood (and 95 percent confidence intervals) of survival and progression-free survival.  *eos Differences between groups in the severity of adverse effects and the frequency of hysterectomy specimens that were negative for cancer were evaluated with use of Pearsons chi-square test.  *eos All reported P values are two-tailed.  *eos Two scheduled interim analyses were conducted during the enrollment phase of the trial, the first was conducted after 29 recurrences had been reported, and the second after 47 recurrences had been reported.  *eos The first stopping rule was chosen to reject the null hypothesis at the 1 percent level, whereas the second was chosen so that the level of rejection for both interim tests was 2 percent.  *eos This interim testing increased the value of the type I error from the conventional 5 percent to 6 percent.  *eos To simplify presentation, the P values were not adjusted for the results of the two interim analyses. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Characteristics of the Patients. *eos From February 1992 to April 1997, a total of 374 women were enrolled in the study at 48 Gynecologic Oncology Group institutions.  *eos Four were subsequently excluded after a central review by the pathology committee found that the specimen was inadequate for evaluation in the case of one patient,the primary lesion had been misidentified in the case of one patient, the cell type had been misidentified in the case of one patient, and the stage of the tumor had been overestimated in the case of one patient.  *eos An additional patient was also excluded because she had received radiotherapy before entry.  *eos Three of these patients had been randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy alone, and two had been assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin.  *eos Thus, a total of 369 patients were evaluated, 186 in the radiotherapy group and 183 in the combined-therapy group. *eos 

Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13 patients (7 percent) assigned to radiotherapy alone and 14 patients (8 percent) assigned to radiotherapy and cisplatin.  *eos There were no significant differences in demographic or tumor characteristics between the two groups (Table 1).  *eos All patients had primary cervical cancers that were at least 4 cm in diameter, and the distribution of the tumors according to size was similar in the two groups.  *eos There was a slightly higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31 percent in the radiotherapy group).  *eos Four patients assigned to the cisplatin regimen (2 percent) received no cisplatin.  *eos A total of 164 patients (90 percent) received four or more courses of cisplatin.  *eos The median weekly dose of cisplatin was 39.0 mg per square meter (10th and 90th percentiles, 32.3 and 40.3, respectively, range, 0 to 49.7).  *eos One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone and two patients assigned to receive radiotherapyand cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy.  *eos Otherwise, compliance with radiotherapy with respect to the dose, the volume, and the total treatment was good and was similar between the two groups (Table 2).  *eos The median total treatment time was 50 days in both groups (Table 2). *eos 

Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent) in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin.  *eos More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. five in the combined-therapy group), and more patients in this group also had an early recurrence (eight vs. two).  *eos There were significantly more hysterectomy specimens without detectable cancer in the combined-therapy group than in the group given radiotherapy alone (52 percent vs. 41 percent, P=0.04). *eos 

Adverse Effects. *eos There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone.  *eos These reactions consisted almost exclusively of transient hematologic effects (39 and 3 patients in the respective groups) and gastrointestinal effects (26 and 9 patients) (Table 3).  *eos Grade 3 hematologic toxicity was defined as a total white-cell count of less than 2000 per cubic millimeter, and grade 4 as a total white-cell count of less than 1000 per cubic millimeter.  *eos Grade 3 gastrointestinal toxicity was defined as intractable vomiting despite treatment with antiemetic drugs that ultimately required hospitalization, and grade 4 as dehydration, gastrointestinal bleeding, or both.  *eos Very few patients required surgical intervention for obstruction or formation of a fistula, and these patients were equally divided between the two groups.  *eos The frequency of grade 1 (minimal) and grade 2 (mild) genitourinary and neurologic adverse effects was higher in the combined-therapy group. *eos 

Progression-free Survival. *eos The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table 4).  *eos This difference predominantly reflects the fact that there were fewer local recurrences in the combined-therapy group (16, vs. 39 in the radiotherapy group).  *eos At the time of this analysis, the rate of progression-free survival was significantly higher among patients in the combined-therapy group (P<0.001 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 1).  *eos The relative risk of recurrence in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.51 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.75). *eos 

Survival. *eos The median duration of follow-up was 36 months.  *eos Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent), as compared with 27 of the patients in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table 4).  *eos One patient who received cisplatin died after an automobile accident, she had no evidence of cancer at her last examination.  *eos The relative risk of death in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.54 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.86).  *eos The threeyear survival rates were 74 percent in the group given radiotherapy alone and 83 percent in the combined-therapy group (P=0.008 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 2).  *eos The numbers of patients who were alive at the time of this analysis but in whom disease had recurred were 20 and 11, respectively. *eos 

Prognostic Factors. *eos Cox multiple regression analysis showed that the size of the tumor as assessed by physical examination and the histologic grade of the tumor were both significant prognostic factors.  *eos Adjustment for these factors had no significant effect on the differences between the groups in survival and progression-free survival.   *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos The treatment of women with bulky stage IB cervical cancers has historically been only partially satisfactory, with survival rates of 70 to 75 percent, substantially below the rates of 88 to 92 percent expected with smaller stage IB cancers.  *eos The recognition, in some centers, that patients with bulky stage  IB cancers had higher rates of recurrent disease within the cervical area led to the inclusion of adjuvant extrafascial hysterectomy in the treatment regimen for these women.  *eos This approach was, however, associated with considerable morbidity.  *eos The use of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy has gradually been abandoned, but there has continued to be disagreement about the value of the operation. *eos 

This controversy stimulated an earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomy after radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone (unpublished data).  *eos In 1992, when the current study was initiated, complete data on survival in the earlier trial were not available, but an early analysis showed a significantly lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region among women who underwent hysterectomy.  *eos Therefore, we chose to test the value of concurrent treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followed by hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy alone followed by hysterectomy. *eos 

Like others, we found that the size of the tumor was an important prognostic factor.  *eos All our patients had cervical cancers of at least 4 cm in diameter, and the distribution of the tumors according to size was similar in the two treatment groups.  *eos The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancers has been uncertain.  *eos Various drugs have been used in clinical trials and  increasingly in clinical practice in the past 15 years.  *eos The possibility that these drugs may have additive effects, regardless of the mechanism, when given concurrently with radiotherapy has been the subject of study.  *eos Cisplatin potentiates the sublethal damageinduced by radiation and inhibits the repair of potentially lethal radiation-induced damage. *eos 

Weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy has been assessed in several phase 2 studies.  *eos The promising results of these studies as well as the fact that this combination is well tolerated and easy to administer on an outpatient basis led us to evaluate it in this trial. *eos 

Both cisplatin and fluorouracil are active against cancer of the cervix in patients with recurrent disease.   *eos The effect of these two drugs in combination with radiotherapy was compared with the effect of hydroxyurea and radiotherapy in a randomized phase 3 trial by the Gynecologic Oncology Group involving patients with cervical cancer of stages IIB through IVA (unpublished data).  *eos In that study, the combination of concurrent radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy was superior to treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy.  *eos The results of a subsequent trial involving similar patients are reported by Rose et al. in this issue of the Journal.  *eos They compared treatment with radiation and hydroxyurea, treatment with radiation and weekly cisplatin, and treatment with radiation and hydroxyurea, cisplatin, and fluorouracil and found that the rate of relapse-free survival was significantly higher in both regimens containing cisplatin.  *eos In addition to these three trials, two other randomized trials have also found that combining radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy improves survival and disease-free survival.  *eos The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, whose results appear elsewhere in this issue of the Journal, compared pelvic and para-aortic radiotherapy with pelvic radiotherapy in  combination with cisplatin and fluorouracil in patients with clinical stage IB through IVA cervical cancer.  *eos The Southwest Oncology Group study compared pelvic radiotherapy alone with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with fluorouracil and cisplatin in high-risk patients  with involvement of lymph nodes or surgical margins who had undergone radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer stage IA2, IB, or IIA (unpublished data).  *eos Both studies found that survival was increased by the use of radiotherapy in combination with cisplatin containing chemotherapy. *eos 

In our trial the only difference in the protocols for the two groups was the use of weekly infusions of cisplatin during radiotherapy for bulky stage IB cervical cancers.  *eos The risk of recurrence and death was significantly reduced by concurrent treatment with cisplatinand radiotherapy.  *eos This difference appeared to be due to the lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region in the combined-therapy group.  *eos Although this regimen was also associated with higher rates of adverse effects, these effects consisted predominantly of transient hematologic and gastrointestinal effects, with no evidence of an increase in other serious effects.  *eos There was no evidence of a difference in the frequencies of late adverse effects between the groups.  *eos Of the 369 eligible patients in our study who were scheduled to undergo hysterectomy after the completion of radiotherapy, 93 percent did undergo the surgery.  *eos We believe that the value of hysterectomy in these patients is doubtful.  *eos In the earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group study that assessed the value of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy, surgery was associated with a significant reduction in the rate of relapses in the pelvic region, but the overall risk of recurrence was not significantly reduced (relative risk, 0.76, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.52 to 1.12) and there was no significant difference in survival (relative risk of death, 0.91).  *eos It is reasonable to conclude on the basis of these results and our results that the elimination of hysterectomy from both regimens would not have affected the increase in survival associated with the use of cisplatin.  *eos Therefore, radiotherapy in combination with treatment with cisplatin should be adequate for patients with bulky stage IB cervical cancer. *eos 

The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that we have discussed involve different stages of cervical cancer and combinations of treatment, but they share a common result, all five studies found that concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy led to better outcomes than radiotherapy alone or in combination with treatments that did not include cisplatin.  *eos This remarkable consistency offers a compelling reason to consider cisplatin therapy in combination with radiotherapy as a new standard of care for patients with bulky stage IB, stage IIB through IVA, and high-risk cervical cancers. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1110</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
OF the estimated 13,700 women in the United States in whom invasive cervical cancer was diagnosed in 1998, nearly 5000 will ultimately die of the disease because of the inadequacies of current treatment.  *eos In the United States, cervical cancer disproportionately affects women who are members of minority groups and women of low socioeconomic status, partly because such women tend to have insufficient access to and knowledge of screening programs for cervical cancer.  *eos The nationwide use of such screening programs has greatly reduced the incidence of invasive cervical cancer. *eos 

Women with early cervical cancer can be successfully treated with radical surgery.  *eos Those with a large cervical lesion at presentation or with spread to the pelvic lymph nodes or other pelvic tissues are usually treated with a combination of external-beam and intracavitary radiation. *eos 

A previous study reported improved survival among women with locally advanced cervical cancer who received prophylactic radiation to the para-aortic nodes.  *eos 

To eradicate micrometastases and sensitize tumor cells to radiation, several studies have explored the use of radiotherapy with concomitant chemotherapy.  *eos The results of these studies are inconclusive and have been criticized because they lacked a comparison group treated with radiation alone and because the radiation therapy used may have been deficient according to current standards.  *eos In 1990, the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG) began a randomized clinical trial to compare the effects on survival of treatment with extended-field radiation and treatment with pelvic radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy in patients with cervical cancer.  *eos We report the first results of this study. *eos 

METHODS. *eos Patients. *eos We enrolled women of all ages who had stages IIB through IVA squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix according to the staging system of the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (Table 1) or stage IB or IIA of one of these cancers with a tumor diameter of at least 5 cm or biopsy-proved metastasis to pelvic lymph nodes.  *eos Women with a Karnofsky performance score of at least 60 and blood counts and serum levels of blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, and bilirubin that were within normal ranges were eligible for the study.  *eos Women were excluded from the study if they met any of the following criteria, disease outside the pelvic area or spread to para-aortic lymph nodes, a prior cancer other than cutaneous basal-cell carcinoma, medical contraindications to chemotherapy, a rare histologic subtype, and prior hysterectomy or transperitoneal staging procedure for cervical cancer, pelvic radiotherapy, or systemic chemotherapy. *eos 

A medical history taking and clinical examination were required before enrollment.  *eos The initial evaluation also included chest radiography, cystoscopy, proctoscopy, a complete blood count, and measurement of liver and renal function.  *eos The renal-collecting system of each patient was assessed by intravenous pyelography or contrast computed tomography.  *eos Para-aortic lymph nodes wereevaluated by bipedal lymphangiography or retroperitoneal surgical exploration. *eos 

The surveillance committees of the National Cancer Institute and participating institutions approved this trial.  *eos Patients were required to understand the trial and provide written informed consent. *eos 

Patients who completed the pretreatment evaluation and met all eligibility criteria were randomly assigned to receive extended field radiotherapy or radiotherapy to the pelvic region with concurrent treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil.  *eos The patients in each treatment group were stratified according to the tumor stage (IB, IIA, or IIB vs. III or IVA) and the staging method used for para-aortic lymph nodes (clinical vs. surgical). *eos 

Treatment. *eos External-beam radiation was delivered with anteroposterior and posteroanterior opposed beams of at least 15-MV photons or the use of four fields (anteroposterior, posteroanterior, and two lateral fields) of at least 4-MV photons.  *eos For patients who were assigned to receive radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the treatment field extended from the space between L4 and L5 to the midpubis or to a line 4 cm below the most distal vaginal or cervical site of disease.  *eos Lateral fields were designed to encompass S3 posteriorly, with a margin of at least 3 cm from the primary cervical tumor.  *eos Custom shielding was designed to treat the pelvic lymph nodes, with a margin of at least 1 to 1.5 cm. For patients who were assigned to receive radiotherapy alone, the pelvic and paraaortic areas were treated as a continuous area, with a superiorfield border at the space between L1 and L2.  *eos The radiation dose was keyed to the central ray at the patients midplane (for anteroposterior posteroanterior fields) or to the isocenter of the beams.  *eos The total dose to be delivered to pelvic lymph nodes as well as to para-aortic nodes was 45 Gy, given at a dose of 1.8 Gy per fraction of radiation. *eos 

The radioisotopes used for low-dose-rate intracavitary radiotherapy were cesium-137 or radium-226 in 392 of 402 patients (98 percent).  *eos The first intracavitary treatment was performed before or during external-beam radiotherapy, and additional external-beam therapy was delivered with a midline block.  *eos Interstitial brachytherapy was used only if necessary to increase the dose directedat distal vaginal sites of disease.  *eos Brachytherapy was performed within two weeks (preferably less than one week) after the completion of pelvic radiation, with the goal of keeping the total duration of treatment under eight weeks when possible.  *eos The protocol specified that all patients receive a total cumulative dose to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cmsuperior to the cervical os) of at least 85 Gy.  *eos The suggested maximal doses to the bladder, the rectum, and the lateral surface of the vagina were 75, 70, and 130 Gy, respectively.  *eos Within 16 hours after the first radiation fraction was administered, patients in the combination-therapy group received the first cycle of chemotherapy, which consisted of an intravenous infusion of 75 mg of cisplatin per square meter of body-surface area over a 4-hour period followed by an intravenous infusion of 4000 mg of fluorouracil per square meter over a 96-hour period.  *eos This timing corresponded to days 1 through 5 of radiation therapy.  *eos Two additional cycles of chemotherapy were scheduled at three-week intervals.  *eos One of these was administered at the time of the second intracavitary insertion.  *eos To avoid treatment delays, intracavitary insertions were performed without chemotherapy if a patient had a granulocyte count of less than 1500 per cubic millimeter and a platelet count of less than 100,000 per cubic millimeter. *eos 

Follow-up. *eos During treatment, patients were evaluated weekly by clinical assessments, a complete blood count with differential and platelet counts, and a pelvic examination.  *eos Before each cycle of chemotherapy, serum levels of creatinine, urea nitrogen, alanine aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin were measured.  *eos Patients had a pelvic examination under anesthesia at the time ofeach intracavitary treatment.  *eos 

Once treatment ended, patients were evaluated every three months for the first two years, every four months during the third year, every six months during the fourth and fifth years, and then annually.  *eos Disease status and the degree of treatment-related toxic effects were assessed by history taking, physical examination, and appropriate laboratory and radiologic tests.  *eos Suspected cases of persistent or recurrent disease were confirmed by a biopsy whenever possible. *eos 

Toxicity was assessed at the time of each evaluation with use of the Cooperative Group Common Toxicity Criteria, the Acute Radiation Morbidity Scoring Criteria, and the Late Radiation Morbidity Scoring Scheme of the RTOG and the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer. *eos 

Quality Control. *eos All chemotherapy records were reviewed by a gynecologic oncologist to assess compliance with the protocol.  *eos Radiotherapy records, including data concerning external-beam fields, intracavitary placement, doses of radiation to tumor and normal tissues, and other treatment variables, were reviewed by a radiation oncologist.  *eos Variations were scored as minor, major but acceptable, or major and unacceptable, if they differed by more than 5, 10, or 20 percent, respectively, from the specified dose of radiation or duration of treatment.  *eos Each institutions equipment was calibrated by employees of the Radiological Physics Center in Houston. *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos Overall survival was the primary end point for the comparison of the two treatments and was calculated from the date of study entry until the date of death or the date of the last follow-up visit.  *eos Death from any cause was considered a failure in the analysis.  *eos Disease- free survival was also compared in the two groups and was calculated from the date of study entry to the date of the first occurrence of disease progression, a second diagnosis of cancer, or death from any cause, or if none of these events occurred, to the date of the last follow-up visit. *eos 

The KaplanMeier method was used to calculate both survival rates.  *eos Log-rank tests were used to compare treatments.  *eos All patients who could be assessed were included in the intentionto-treat analysis.  *eos Five-year rates of secondary end points such as locoregional recurrence, para-aortic recurrence, and distant metastasis were estimated with the use of cumulative-incidence methods,and treatment effects were tested with use of the Gray algorithm.  *eos The Cox proportional-hazards model was used to estimate the hazard ratios.  *eos 

The statistical significance of associations between treatment assignments and characteristics of the patients was assessed by chi-square analysis.  *eos Acute side effects of treatment were defined as those that occurred within 60 days after the completion of radiotherapy, and late effects were defined as those occurring or persisting more than 60 days after radiotherapy.  *eos The study was initially designed to be able to detect a reduction of 33 percent in the annual death rate, with a statistical power of 80 percent and a two-sided significance level of 0.05.  *eos On the basis of the results of two earlier RTOG trials, we predicted that the five-year survival rate for the control group (radiotherapy alone) would be 65 percent for patients with stage IB or II disease and 40 percent for patients with stage III or IVA disease.  *eos We estimated that 40 to 70 percent of the patients would have stage IB or II disease.  *eos A 33 percent reduction in the death rate as a result of chemotherapy would yield an absolute improvement of approximately 10 percent in the five-year survival rate.  *eos To detect such a difference, we predicted that we would need to enroll 400 women in the study over a four-year period and then follow them for an additional four years.  *eos We estimated that 199 women would have died by the time of the initial analysis of treatment. *eos Interim analyses were scheduled to occur when 50 percent of the patients had been enrolled and when the enrollment goal was met.  *eos Early reporting of results was permitted if a significant difference was observed between the two treatment groups.  *eos The nominal significance level required for early reporting was origioriginally set at P=0.005, but we subsequently adopted a more conservative approach, because it allowed the number of deaths observed to determine the nominal level required for early reporting.  *eos The results of the interim analyses, in which patients treatment assignments were masked, were presented to the datamonitoring committee.  *eos At the interim analysis conducted in July 1998 after the enrollment goal was met, the difference between the two groups was determined to have met the requirements for early reporting.  *eos For this early report, we updated the results using all information received and entered at study headquarters by November 11, 1998. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Characteristics of the Patients. *eos A total of 403 patients were enrolled in the study between September 1990 and November 1997, 201 were randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy and concurrent chemotherapy, and 202 were assigned to receive radiotherapy alone.  *eos Fifteen patients (4 percent)  six in the combined-therapy group and nine in the radiotherapy group  were subsequently disqualified because of failure to undergo the required evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes (eight patients), the presence of extrapelvic cancer (two), the presence of a rare histologic subtype (one), the presence of a stage IB1 tumor with no involvement of pelvic nodes (one), the absence of pretreatment data (two), and receipt of chemotherapy before radiotherapy (one).  *eos The 388 remaining patients (195 in the combined-therapy group and 193 in the radiotherapy group) form the basis of this analysis.  *eos The characteristics of the two treatment groups are summarized in Table 2.  *eos There were no significant differences in these characteristics between the groups.  *eos 

Treatment and Compliance. *eos Radiotherapy was delivered according to the protocol or with minor deviations in 83 percent of the patients in the combined-therapy group and 84 percent of those in the radiotherapy group.  *eos Major but acceptable treatment deviations occurred in another 1 percent and 9 percent of these groups, respectively.  *eos Eleven patients (3 percent) did not undergo brachytherapy, three patients refused, and eight patients did not undergo it for other reasons.  *eos In all, 26 patients did not complete treatment.  *eos The median total duration of radiation was 58 days, with a mean dose of 89 Gy delivered to point A in each group.  *eos Of the 195 patients in the combination-therapy group, 159 (81 percent) completed at least two cycles of chemotherapy, and 133 (68 percent) completed three cycles.  *eos Chemotherapy was discontinued because of toxic effects in 9 patients, refusal to continue in the case of 17 patients, diminished performance status in 4 patients, and other reasons in 4 patients.  *eos Four patients refused or were unable to receive ny chemotherapy but were included in the analysis according to the intention to treat. *eos 

Side Effects. *eos Although moderate (grade 3) and severe (grade 4) side effects occurred more frequently during or within 60 days after the completion of treatment with combined therapy than with radiotherapy alone, these effects were usually self-limited or resolved with medical management (Table 3).  *eos Hematologic effects were generally moderate.  *eos The late complications of treatment are summarized in Table 4.  *eos There were no significant differences in the seriousness of late effects between the treatment groups. *eos 

Outcome. *eos The median duration of follow-up was 43 months.  *eos Follow-up data were available for 193 of the 195 patients in the combined-therapy group and for all 193 patients in the radiotherapy group.  *eos Of these, 147 patients in the combined-therapy group (76 percent) and 122 patients in the radiotherapy group (63 percent) were alive at the time of the last analysis.  *eos In addition, 13 patients in the combined-therapy group and 32 patients in the radiotherapy group were alive  but had recurrent cervical cancer.  *eos KaplanMeier analysis revealed that overall survival rates were significantly better among patients treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy than among those treated with radiotherapy alone (73 percent vs. 58 percent, P=0.004) (Table 5 and Fig. 1).  *eos Disease-free survivalat five years was 67 percent in the combined-therapy group and 40 percent in the radiotherapy group, according to KaplanMeier analysis (P<0.001) (Fig. 2).  *eos The relative likelihood of disease-free survival in the combined-therapy group, as compared with the radiotherapy group, was 0.48 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.35 to 0.66).  *eos The rates of distant relapse were 14 percent in the combined-therapy group and 33 percent in the radiotherapy group (P<0.001), with a relative risk of relapse of 0.39 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.24 to 0.63) in the combined-therapy group.  *eos The rate of locoregional recurrences was 19 percent in the combinedtherapy group and 35 percent in the radiotherapy group (P<0.001), with a relative risk of locoregional recurrences of 0.47 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.31 to 0.71) in the combined-therapy group. *eos 

The estimated five-year survival rates according to various stratification variables are summarized in Table 5.  *eos Approximately 70 percent of the patients assigned to each group had stage IB, IIA, or IIB disease.  *eos For these patients, overall survival was significantly better if they were treated with radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  *eos There was no significant difference in overall survival between treatment groups among patients who had stage III or IVA disease, although  the study was not designed to have a sufficient number of patients in these subgroups to test for a statistically significant difference.  *eos For patients with stage III or IVA disease, the five-year disease-free survival rates were 58 percent in the combinedtherapy group and 38 percent in the radiotherapy group (P=0.13). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos We found that the combination of pelvic radiation and concomitant chemotherapy with cisplatin and fluorouracil was more effective for locally advanced cervical cancer than pelvic and para-aortic radiation alone.  *eos The inclusion of chemotherapy substantially reduced both local and distant recurrences of cervical cancer, leading to higher overall and disease-free survival rates.  *eos Although chemotherapy  increased the hematologic toxicity, this effect was reversible and the incidence of late side effects was similar in the two treatment groups.  *eos 

We are not the first to investigate the role of concomitant chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer.  *eos The Gynecologic Oncology Group has also studied the effect of radiotherapy in combination with either hydroxyurea or placebo in women with stage IIIB or IVA disease.  *eos Although the group reported significant improvements in overall and disease-free survival with the addition of hydroxyurea therapy, the study has been criticized for the use of a low dose of radiation and the poor survival rates in both groups and because more than half of the 190 patients who were enrolled could not be evaluated.  *eos Despite these criticisms, the resultsof that study and those of trials assessing concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy for other tumors stimulated studies of the effects of radiotherapy and various combinations of fluorouracil, cisplatin, mitomycin, carboplatin, and paclitaxel as treatments for locally advanced cervical cancer.The results of these trials have been encouraging, but mostclinicians have not found them sufficiently  convincing to justify the inclusion of chemotherapy in the routine treatment of locally advanced cervical cancer.  *eos Our treatment regimen differed from previous regimens in several ways.  *eos Our protocol emphasized the importance of delivering a radiation dose of atleast 85 Gy to point A within eight weeks whenever possible.  *eos As a result, the median dose was higher and the median duration of treatment was shorter than those reported in other studies.  *eos The results of the Patterns of Care studies and large retrospective analyses suggest that these features correlate with survival rates and rates of local control of cervical cancer.  *eos We also used a somewhat more aggressive regimen of chemotherapy than have other groups.  *eos We used a higher dose of cisplatin (75 mg per square meter) than that used with fluorouracil in the Gynecologic Oncology Group studies, and we also included a third cycle of chemotherapy during one of the intracavitary procedures.  *eos The importance of this third cycle is uncertain, but because close to 25 percentof the total paracentral dose of radiation is delivered with each intracavitary procedure, the addition of concurrent chemotherapy during this time may be important. *eos 

Reports by Rose et al. and Keys et al. in this issue of the Journal strengthen the body of evidence supporting the use of combined therapy in women with advanced cervical cancer.  *eos Future studies will continue to evaluate cisplatin and fluorouracil as well as other drugs to determine the most effective doses and routes of administration.  *eos Weekly or daily infusions of cisplatin are well tolerated.  *eos For patients who were receiving postoperative radiation for rectal cancer, a prolonged, continuous infusion of fluorouracil with pelvic radiation was found to be more effective than short infusions.  *eos We do not know whether the combination of fluorouracil and cisplatinis more effective than either drug alone.  *eos The role of prophylactic extended-field radiation has always been controversial.  *eos In our study, the benefit of para-aortic radiation may have been less than that observed in an earlier RTOG trial, because our trial required more rigorous staging of para-aortic lymph nodes and included patients with more advanced pelvic disease.  *eos However, no radiographic test is currently capable of detecting microscopic paraaortic disease, and selected patients may still benefit from prophylactic para-aortic radiation.  *eos For patients with known metastases to the para-aortic lymph nodes, para-aortic radiation is probably necessary.  *eos Another RTOG study tested the feasibility of combining hyperfractionated extended-field radiation with the same regimen of cisplatin and fluorouracil that we used.  *eos The acute side effects were severe, possibly because of the addition of chemotherapy or the altered regimen of fractionation. *eos 

We believe there is now sufficient evidence to recommend that women with locally advanced cervical cancer confined to the pelvis receive pelvic radiation concomitantly with treatment with cisplatin and fluorouracil.  *eos Future studies are needed to define the optimal regimen for these agents and to evaluate other combinations.  *eos The role of extended-field radiation with chemotherapy must also be defined. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1111</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
INTRODUCTION. *eos Stage I cervical cancer has a relatively favorable prognosis with an 80% cure rate achieved with radical hysterectomy or radiotherapy.  *eos However, the 20% mortality after surgery has remained virtually unchanged during the past three decades.  *eos Certain clinical and pathologic risk factors for Stage 1 cervical cancer recurrence have been identified.  *eos Pelvic lymph node metastases, for example have been known to decrease the 5-year survival from 82 to 90% in patients with negative nodes to 38 to 61% in patients with positive lymph nodes.  *eos Additional risk factors for recurrence, e.g., large tumor diameter (LTD), deep stromal invasion (DSI), and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces (CLS) found on microscopic examination have been only recently recognized and less extensively investigated than lymph node metastases.  *eos However, sufficient data have been reported in the literature to categorize LTD, DSI, and CLS as independent risk factors because of their frequent association with increased cancer recurrence and mortality.  *eos An analysis of data on 575 women enrolled in a previous Gynecologic Oncology Group (GOG) study of clinical and pathologic predictors of surgically treated stage carcinoma of the cervix confirmed the roles of LTD, DSI, and CLS as risk factors, increasing the probability of cancer recurrence at 3 years from 2 to 31%.  *eos Furthermore, that study estimated that the proportion of women with such risk factors was 25% of all Stage IB cervical cancer patients with negative lymph nodes.  *eos The results of that GOG study were subsequently published in 1990.  *eos 

Traditionally, women with lymph node metastases have been treated with postoperative adjuvant radiotherapy.  *eos Several authors proposed that patients with certain primary tumorrelated factors such as LTD, DSI, and CLS might also benefit from postoperative radiotherapy.  *eos One of them reported favorable results from an uncontrolled trial of adjuvant radiotherapy. *eos 

In 1988 the GOG initiated a prospective randomized study (GOG #92), reported here, to investigate the benefits and risks of adjuvant radiotherapy for Stage I cervical cancer patients treated by conventional radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy and who were at high risk for recurrence, because of LTD, DSI, CLS, but excluding patients with lymph node metastases. *eos 

PATIENTS AND METHODS. *eos Study Design. *eos The GOG #92 multicenter prospective randomized study was designed to determine whether postoperative pelvic radiotherapy following radical hysterectomy and pelvic node dissection would reduce the rate of recurrence and decrease the mortality in Stage IB cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep stromal invasion by tumor, and presence of tumor in the capillary lymphatic spaces found on microscopic examination.  *eos A previous GOG study estimated that women with one of the following combinations of risk factors had, on average, a 31% chance of recurring in 3 years.  *eos Women with one of the combinations of risk factors as defined in Table 1 were eligible to enter this study.  *eos 

The studys target sample size was set at 169 eligible patients based on a desire to detect a 55% decrease in recurrence rate (exponential model with l 5 0.01 recurrences/month) with the use of radiation therapy.  *eos In 1993, the sample size goal was increased because of the lower than expected recurrence rate, a better estimate of the change in the recurrence rate over time, and a small, but significant, frequency of noncompliance in the radiation therapy (RT) regimen.  *eos The revised sample size goal was 260 patients and the final analysis of recurrence-free interval would occur once 60 recurrences were observed.  *eos This goal would allow the detection of a 47% reduction in the risk of recurrence with complete compliance or 50% reduction with 8% noncompliance among those registeredto the RT regimen.  *eos All designs allowed for 80% statistical power when performing a one-tail test at the 0.05 level. *eos 

Eligibility. *eos Written informed consent was obtained from all patients prior to entry on study fulfilling all institutional, state, and federal regulations.  *eos Patients were eligible for the study if they had primary Stage IB squamous, adenosquamous carcinoma, or adenocarcinoma of cervix initially treated with a standard radical hysterectomy and who had negative lymph nodes but one of the previously described combination of risk factors.  *eos Radical hysterectomy required removal of the uterus and contiguous parametrial tissue to its most lateral extent along with paravaginal tissue and upper quarter of the vagina along the proximal uterosacral ligaments.  *eos The ureter had to be unroofed from its entry into the broad ligament to its intramural portion in the bladder and dissected laterally from its attachments to the cardinal ligament.  *eos Pelvic lymphadenectomy required bilateral removal of all nodal tissue and skeletonization of all vessels from the mid portion of the psoas muscle to uterer medially including the hypogastric artery and vein and from the obturator fossa anterior to the obturator nerve.  *eos Tumor diameter was estimated by palpation.  *eos Institutional pathologists measured the depth of stromal tumor invasion with a millimeter ruler and made a determination of a presence or absence of CLS.  *eos Other eligibility criteria for enrollment into the study included normal blood counts, normal liver and kidney function, absence of genitourinary tract abnormality as determined by intravenous pyelogram, renal sonogram, or computerized tomography, and absence of intercurrent diseases or other conditions that might not permit completion of the study or the required follow-up.  *eos After the eligibility criteria were verified, patients were randomly assigned to one of the two regimens, pelvic radiation or no further therapy.  *eos 

Radiation Therapy. *eos Radiation therapy was started within 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively.  *eos Patients received external beam irradiation and no brachytherapy.  *eos The pelvic irradiation was given with a fourfield technique with a megavoltage beam, although cobalt-60 was allowed if the SSD was greater than 80 cm. Radiation dose was from 46 Gy in 23 fractions to 50.4 Gy in 28 fractions, 5 fractions per week.  *eos Each patient was to be given daily fractions of 1.80 2.00 Gy over 41/2 to 6 weeks.  *eos Treatment breaks for clinical problems (vomiting or diarrhea) were allowed to total no more than 1 week. *eos 

Follow-up Observation. *eos Patients were to be evaluated by physical examination, blood counts, blood chemistries, and chest x-rays, every 3 months during the first 2 years of follow-up, and every 6 months during the subsequent years.  *eos Intravenous pyelogram, renal sonogram, or computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast was to be done at 6 months and then yearly.  *eos Results of these tests as well as changes of therapy, adverse effects, progression, or death were reported. *eos 

Quality Control. *eos All histology slides were reviewed by two pathologists of the GOG Pathology Committee who measured the depth of stromal invasion expressed in thirds of cervical thickness and ascertained the presence or absence of the capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement and the tumor cell type.  *eos Any disagreement among the reviewing pathologists was resolved by a GOG referee pathologist.  *eos The Radiotherapy Committee examined therapy forms, diagrams of irradiated fields, dosimetry curves, and portal fields for each external field.  *eos Review of operative reports was conducted to evaluate the completeness of surgical procedures. *eos 

Statistical Methods. *eos The primary outcome variable was recurrence-free interval (RFI).  *eos RFI was defined as the time from study entry to physical or radiographic evidence of disease recurrence, or date the patient was last seen.  *eos Similarly, survival is defined from date of study entry to death, or date last seen.  *eos Sites of recurrence were classified as local if detected in the pelvis or vagina, and distant if detected in extrapelvic locations.  *eos Life tables were computed using the method of Kaplan and Meier.  *eos The difference in RFI and survival by treatment regimen was evaluated using the log-rank test applying the intent-to-treat principle.  *eos The difference between treatment regimens, while adjusting for prognostic factors, was accomplished using the Cox Model.  *eos Imbalances between patient and disease characteristics and treatment regimens was accomplished using the Pearsons x2 test.  *eos When the characteristic was continuous (e.g., age) the KruskalWallis test was used. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Between March 1988 and September 1995, 299 women were accessioned into the study.  *eos Twenty-two patients were excluded, 14 because of lack of documentation of high risk criteria, 4 for wrong stage, 1 for inadequate surgery, 2 for inadequate pathology material for review, and 1 for not having an intravenous pyelogram or CT scan.  *eos Of the remaining 277 eligible patients, 137 were randomly assigned to radiotherapy and 140 to no further treatment.  *eos One hundred and fifty-one patients (55%) were white, 56 (20%) were black, 27 (10%) were Hispanic, and 21 (8%) were Asian.  *eos The median age at study entry was 41 (range, 2080) and the 25th and 75th percentiles were 34 and 50, respectively.  *eos The tumor cell type was squamous in 218 (79%) women, adenosquamous in 32 (12%), and adenocarcinoma in 27 (10%).  *eos The distribution of these factors as well as the GOG performance scale were well balanced between the two treatment regimens (Table 2).  *eos There were 128 (46%) patients with the risk factors of positive CLS and deep one-third stromal invasion, 65 (23%) had positive CLS, middle third stromal invasion and tumor size $2 cm, 82 (30%) had negative CLS, middle or deep third stromal invasion and a $4-cm tumor, and 2 (0.7%) had positive CLS, superficial stromal invasion, and tumor size $5 cm (Table 3).  *eos The distribution of individual risk factors between the treatment regimen was somewhat imbalanced.  *eos There was a disproportionately larger number of patients with positive CLS among the NFT regimen (24% versus 35%) and more patients with .4 cm diameter tumors in the RT regimen (62% versus 54%).  *eos However, the overall risk for recurrence was very similar in each regimen when all three risk factors were considered as a group (See Cox Model analyses). *eos 

Of the 137 patients randomized to radiotherapy, 9 (6.6%) refused all radiotherapy and 6 (4.4%) refused to continue therapy after receiving less than 85% of the prescribed dose of 50.4 Gy (3.6, 3.6, 10.4, 14.4, 16.2, and 36.0 Gy).  *eos One patient discontinued radiotherapy due to an adverse reaction after receiving 21.6 Gy.  *eos In addition, 9 (6.6%) noncompliant patients had acceptable radiation doses ($85% of 50.4 Gy) but in excess of 20% protraction of overall treatment time.  *eos Two other patients exceeded 20% protraction of treatment time due to an adverse reaction to the radiation requiring interruption of therapy.  *eos Thirty-nine (27.9%) of the 140 women in the NFT group developed cancer recurrence, 27 (19.3%) local (vagina or pelvis), and 10 (7.1%) distant.  *eos By contrast, there were only 21 (15.3%) cancer recurrences, 18 (13.1%) local and 3 (2.2%) distant among the 137 patients treated with postoperative radiation.  *eos The site of recurrence was unknown for 2 patients.  *eos Notably, there were only 2 isolated vaginal vault recurrences in the irradiated group versus 8 among the NFT patients.  *eos The logrank test was statistically significant (P 5 0.008, one-tail).  *eos The crude estimate in the reduction in risk in patients receiving adjuvant radiotherapy was 47% (i.e., relative risk 5 0.53) with the recurrence-free rate of 88% in the radiotherapy group and 79% in the no-further-therapy group at 2 years (Fig. 1).  *eos Fortyfive (78%) of 58 recurrences were local only (vagina or pelvis)  (Table 4).  *eos Eighty-six percent of patients have either died or have been followed at least 3 years.  *eos The median follow-up is 5 years for those who are alive with no evidence of disease.  *eos The Cox model analysis indicated that when adjusting for all combinations of the three risk factorstumor size, CLS, and the depth of invasionthe risk of recurrence was significantly reduced by 44% in the radiation group (P 5 0.019, one-tail).  *eos Forty-eight patients have died as of this report (final analysis of survival awaits further follow-up until 60 deaths have occurred).  *eos Thirty (21%) patients among those in the NFT group died, 25 (18%) from cancer, compared to 18 (13%) deaths in the RT group, 15 (11%) of whom died from cancer with one attributable to treatment (Table 5).  *eos The relative mortality rate is estimated at 0.64 which indicates 36% less mortality in the radiation group, a significance level is not provided because the survival data are not mature. *eos 

There is a small but noteworthy imbalance in the follow-up between the two treatment regimens.  *eos Of those who are alive, six patients are lost-to-follow-up within the first year in the RT group while one is lost in the NFT group.  *eos Within 2 years on study, there are eight and three patients in the RT group and NFT group, respectively.  *eos In an attempt to evaluate the impact of this imbalance, the logrank test was recalculated assuming the first five patients lost (the excess number) in the RT group recurred at the time of their last clinical evaluation.  *eos The difference between treatment groups remained statistically significant.  *eos The adverse effects by organ system and treatment group are displayed in Table 6.  *eos Nine (7.0%) of the 128 patients who received radiotherapy had 11 episodes of grade 3 (severe) or 4 (life-threatening) adverse effects compared to 3 (2.1%) from the NFT group.  *eos Of the 3 patients with grade 4 toxicities, 1 patient had a complication involving the urogenital tract, 1 gastrointestinal, and 1 both hematologic and urogenital toxicity.  *eos The patient who developed an enteric fistula managed by enterocoelic bypass died from cancer.  *eos Another patient with a vesico-vaginal fistula died from complications of bacteremia, including renal and liver failure and disseminated intravascular coagulation.  *eos One patient with severely decreased bladder volume required a permanent Indiana pouch urinary conduit for relief of urinary incontinence.  *eos Other serious adverse effects regressed either spontaneously (transient paraplegia in one patient), or after treatment (percutaneous nephrostomies for bilateral ureteral obstruction and transfusion of packed cells for severe anemia with a drop of hematocrit to 20%). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos The risk factors used to select patients for this study have been investigated and reported in the literature.  *eos Both large tumor diameter and deep stromal invasion are indices of large tumor volume, conceivably affecting cancer progression and its metastatic spread.  *eos Chung et al. reported that cervical cancer larger than 4 cm in diameter determined by preoperative palpation was associated with a 5-fold increase in pelvic lymph node metastases, a 10-fold increase in recurrences, and a 50% decrease in survival.  *eos Deep tumor invasion into cervical stroma (measured either in millimeters or in thirds of the total cervical thickness) has been also shown in association withlymph node metastases, recurrence, and poorer survival.  *eos The invasion of lymphvascular spaces by tumor has been found to be an unfavorable prognostic factor by many investigators but its significance was denied by others.  *eos Boyce reported that vascular invasion contributed prognostic information beyond the cervical size.  *eos Sedlis et al., in a GOG study of microinvasive cervical carcinoma, reported two deaths among the 23% patients with vascular spread.  *eos However, Roche and Norris questioned the validity of the CLS finding because, as they state, if enough sections are made, most cases might show vascular invasion.  *eos Boyce et al. emphasized that a combination of risk factors correlated better with the survival than one factor alone. *eos 

Of the three risk factors, depth of invasion seems the most objective and accurate methoda direct measurement on the histological slide.  *eos Furthermore, repeat measurements from thesame slide can be taken by the reviewers for the quality control procedures. *eos 

Estimating tumor diameter by palpation is more subjective and imprecise than the direct measurement of the depth of invasion.  *eos In addition, preoperative tumor size cannot be verified for quality control.  *eos Nevertheless, we found tumor diameter to be the most significant risk factors in the Cox model analysis of our study results, confirming multiple data sets which demonstrate that the size of the primary cancer is critical for local control despite the imprecision of measurement.  *eos The evaluation of capillary lymphatic space involvement is also subjective.  *eos Significant interobserver variability was reported by Zaino et al. in a recent study on reproducibility of pathologists assessment of vascular invasion and other histological predictors.  *eos The formula combining the three risk factors that we used to determine patient eligibility may appear complicated.  *eos Nevertheless, the use of this formula by the participating institutions has been successful in achieving a high acceptance rate with only 22 patients (7%) found ineligible for the study. *eos 

We reanalyzed our results using the Cox model trying to simplify the formula or to use only a single risk factor as a predictor.  *eos However, the combination of factors proved more accurate than any of the factors alone.  *eos A detailed GOG clinical pathologic study had established that certain patients with poor prognostic factors related to the primary tumor (i.e., large tumor size, deep stromal invasion, and capillary lymphatic space tumor involvement) but without lymph node involvement had a risk of recurrence of 31% after radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy.  *eos The present prospective randomized study showed that adjunctive radiotherapy significantly reduced the number of cancer recurrences in women with the above risk factors by 44% and that the difference in recurrences between irradiated and nonirradiated patients was statistically significant at the P 5 0.019 level.  *eos However, caution must be observed due to the disproportionately higher number of patients that are lost to followup among those receiving radiation therapy and the need for further follow-up to determine what impact radiation therapy has on survival.  *eos It is conceivable that higher pelvic radiation doses could further reduce the pelvic local failure rate.  *eos However, addition of vault brachytherapy is unlikely to improve the results since there were only two isolated vault failures.  *eos There were significantly fewer recurrences in the irradiated group, the numbers of both pelvic and distal recurrences were less.  *eos How local therapy affects distal spread is not clearly understood, hypothetical mechanisms include eliminating the risk of subsequent spread from an uncontrolled primary.  *eos The use of adjuvant radiotherapy to improve the outcome in the Stage I cervical cancer patients with large tumor diameter, deep invasion, and CLS has been previously proposed.  *eos One report showed that postoperative radiation prevented local recurrences and improved ten year tumor-free-survival in a small number of women with CLS, DSI, and microscopically involved lymph nodes.  *eos More recently, Thomas and Dembo postulated that women with negative nodes but primary tumor-related poor prognostic factors were more likely to recur in the pelvis than in distant sites and, therefore, may benefit from pelvic irradiation.  *eos By contrast, in women with positive nodes local failure is more frequently associated with metastases in distant sites that are not affected by pelvic irradiation.  *eos Interestingly, our prospective study did provide conclusive evidence of pelvic radiotherapy being effective in women with primary tumor-related risk factors but negative nodes.  *eos However, no such evidence from randomized trials is available about effective treatment of positive lymph nodes.  *eos The GOG attempted to conduct a randomized radiotherapy trial for women with positive nodes, but could not complete the study because of failure to enroll a sufficient number of patients (unpublished GOG data).  *eos Our present study confirms both predicted and reported benefits from postoperative radiation.It should be noted that the 27% recurrence rate at 3 years in our study population is lower than the anticipated one-third.  *eos This difference can be explained by an overestimation of risk by the regression model which commonly occurs, this phenomena is sometimes referred to as regression to the mean.  *eos Partly due to this lower risk, the sample size was increased in August 1993 in order that the statistical power of the trial would be maintained. *eos 

A significant number of women with Stage IB cervical cancer should benefit from adjuvant pelvic irradiation because 25% of the lymph-node negative patients have high risk factors according to the 1990 GOG data.  *eos Moreover, Thomas and Dembo have demonstrated that, in absolute terms, an equal number of deaths occur among the estimated 85% of Stage IB cervical cancer patients with negative nodes as among the 15% with positive nodes.  *eos Since the node-negative group accounts for one-half of all Stage IB cervical cancer deaths adjuvant radiotherapy for women with risk factors should substantially reduce the overall Stage IB mortality.  *eos Increased morbidity in patients receiving full course radiotherapy following radical surgery for cervical cancer has been reported.  *eos Especially vulnerable to adverse radiation effects are the bladder and the ureters due to compromised circulation from surgical dissection and the intestines because of adhesions and reduced motility.  *eos In our study, major lifethreatening adverse effects were encountered in 5 (4%) womenamong the 128 who received radiotherapy.  *eos One of these women died from complications of enteric fistula and another died from cancer after successful management of intestinal injury.  *eos Three of 5 women with major adverse effects recovered either spontaneously or after appropriate treatment.  *eos The rate of postradiation complications in our study was similar to those reported in the literature. *eos 

Thus, adjunctive radiotherapy is beneficial for Stage I cervical cancer patients with clinicalpathological risk factors for recurrence other than positive nodes.  *eos This conclusion is based on a significant reduction of cancer recurrences in patients in our study and acceptably low morbidity with a single treatment-related fatality. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1115</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
INTRODUCTION. *eos Radical external beam plus intracavitary radiation continues to be the standard therapy for advanced cervical cancer to which all new therapies must be compared.  *eos While this treatment is relatively effective in small volume tumors, tumor control and survival decline as the bulk of pelvic disease and FIGO stage advance.  *eos Overall 5-year survival rates are reported for stage IIB cancers between 50 and 80% and from 25 to 50% for stage III.  *eos No substantial improvements have beenmade in the treatment of advanced cervical cancer in the past two decades.  *eos An analysis of the patterns of failure after radiation therapy in locally advanced cervical cancer reveals that of those who recur over 70% have some component of pelvic failure as the first site of relapse and two-thirds develop some component of distant disease.  *eos As the bulk of pelvic diseaseincreases, the proportion of patients with disease recurrent or persistent in the pelvis as the only site of failure increases compared to the proportion developing distant metastases.  *eos The problem of enhancing pelvic control and survival cannot be approached simply by increasing conventionally delivered radiation dose since late complications produced by radiation are at the upper limit of acceptability with currently employed doses. *eos 

Many investigations are ongoing to identify more effective treatment.  *eos These include modifications of radiation treatment volume or fractionation including extended field radiation, hyperfractionated RT, strategies to overcome the negative impact of tumor hypoxia such as hyperbaric oxygen, or hypoxic cell radiation sensitizers.  *eos In addition to modifications of radiation therapy multiple studies have investigated, and are investigating, strategies that combine radiation with chemotherapy either as neoadjuvant or concurrent administration.  *eos The results reported for trials of neoadjuvant cisplatin-containing chemotherapy prior to radiation have been disappointing with six randomized trials, showing no advantage in local control or survival and possibly some detrimental effect. *eos 

Concurrent chemotherapy with radiation offers a number of theoretical advantages over those of the neoadjuvant strategy.  *eos These advantages include no delay in the start of definitive irradiation, no prolongation of overall treatment time (thus minimizing the theoretical risk of accelerated clonogen proliferation during the antineoplastic course), and possible interaction of the concurrently administered chemotherapy with radiation through such mechanisms as inhibition of repair of radiation damage, cell synchronization, recruitment of nonproliferating cells into cell cycle, and reduction of the hypoxic fraction.  *eos Chemotherapy may also, as in the neoadjuvant strategy, have an independent, additive cytotoxic effect.  *eos Theoretical disadvantages of concurrent administration include increased acute toxicity which might limit or delay the delivery of definitive irradiation or increased late toxicity particularly if the drugs and radiation do not exhibit toxicity independence.  *eos Last, it is unlikely that concurrent chemotherapy usually given as only one or two doses would significantly reduce established distant micrometastases.  *eos To date, the only reported randomized studies of concurrent therapy are those of hydroxyurea and radiation versus radiation alone.  *eos While these studies suggested some benefit for patients with FIGO stage IIIB cancer, methodological problems in the study have not resulted in wide acceptance of the conclusion of benefit from concurrent hydroxyurea and its concurrent use has not entered standard practice. *eos 

Interest in infusional 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) with or without other agents such as mitomycin C and cisplatin, developed from both laboratory data suggesting enhanced tumor cell kill over radiation alone and clinical data.  *eos The success of concurrent regimens with these agents in patients with squamous cell carcinomas of other sites such as the anal canal and esophagus suggested that similar regimens were worthy of exploration in carcinomas of the cervix.  *eos In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FU to radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect.  *eos Nakajima et al. also had shown that enhancement could be improved by increasing the concentration of 5-FU.  *eos The optimal dosing schedule for maximizing cell kill with infusional 5-FU and radiation remains undefined, but laboratory data suggested greater effects with increasing dose and prolonged exposure to 5-FU and when drug was present for intervals in excess of 48 h after radiation.  *eos An earlier extensive phase I/II study of radical irradiation and infusional 5-FU based on the in vitro information established a safe regimen with acceptable toxicity for comparison in this randomized study. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Between May of 1987 and August of 1995, 234 patients predominantly from two centers, with others participating, were stratified by their extent of pelvic disease and randomized to receive one of four possible treatments.  *eos The original statistical design required 292 patients but the study was closed early due to poor accrual.  *eos Stratification was based on a retrospective analyses which defined subgroups with different prognoses based on a combination of FIGO stage and pelvic disease volume.  *eos All patients were to have tumors 5 cm or greater regardless of FIGO stage (stages IB, II, IVA).  *eos Stratum 1 included those with FIGO stage IB/IIA or stage IIB with parametrial involvement limited to one or both medial parametria.  *eos Stratum 2 included those with FIGO stage IIB disease with any lateral parametrial involvement or stage IIIB with involvement of one pelvic sidewall.  *eos Stratum 3 included those with FIGO stage IIIB and bilateral pelvic wall involvement or stage IVA.  *eos Eligible patients were to have biopsy proven invasive carcinoma of the cervix of any pathological type excluding small cell carcinoma and to have primary radiotherapy with curative intent selected as their definitive treatment.  *eos 

Exclusion criteria included preexisting malignancy except basal or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.  *eos A screening chest X-ray was to be negative for metastases and if lymphography or abdominal CT scanning was performed, there should be no apparent evidence of involvement of the para-aortic nodes.  *eos The protocol was reviewed by the ethics committees of the involved universities and hospitals and patients gave informed consent for study.  *eos Patients were randomized to receive either (a) standard external beam pelvic irradiation (EBRT) in a dose of 5000 cGy in 25 fractions defined at 100% versus, (b) RT as in arm (a) with infusional intravenous 5-FU in a dose of 1 g/m2 daily on the first and last 4 days of RT, (c) partially hyperfractionated RT, 5280 cGy in 33 fractions, 2 fractions per day on the first and last 4 days of RT, or (d) arm (c) with the same infusional 5-FU.  *eos After EBRT all patients were planned to receive low dose rate intracavitary irradiation to deliver a dose of 40 Gy at point A. *eos 

The radiation energy to be used was 6 MeV or greater.  *eos Patients were treated prone preferably using a four-field box technique, or a parallel pair.  *eos A posterior midline attenuator of two half value layers, 3 cm in width at the midplane of the pelvis was used to reduce the dose to the bladder and rectum.  *eos The attenuator was used throughout the treatment course in those treated with a box technique and for half the fractions in those treated with a parallel pair.  *eos The partially hyperfractionated radiation fractionation schedule used equal fraction sizes of 160 cGy.  *eos Twice daily treatments on days 1 to 4 and 22 to 25 were delivered at least at 6 h apart.  *eos The superior border of the radiation treatment volume was the L5/S1 junction, the inferior, the bottom of the obdurator foramina, or 2 cm below the lowest identified extent of vaginal disease.  *eos Laterally the fields included, with a 1-cm margin, the pelvic sidewall lymph nodes visualized by lymphography.  *eos Where lymphography was not performed, the lateral margins were 2 to 2 1/2 cm wider than the bony pelvis.  *eos The anterior border of the lateral fields was in front of the symphysis pubis, while the posterior border was tailored to the clinical evaluation of the presence or absence of utero sacral disease extension.  *eos If necessary to encompass disease, the volume could include the entire rectum.  *eos Intracavitary irradiation was to be delivered as soon after external beam therapy as possible using a linear source without colpostats, usually of cesium-137.  *eos It was loaded to extend at least 2 cm above the clinically identified superior extent of disease and inferiorly to 1 cm below the cervix or 1 cm below the lowest extent of vaginal disease identified after external therapy.  *eos For rare patients with disease extension to the lower one-third of vagina, the first application to the cervix and uterus was modified to deliver 30 Gy at 2 cm from the center of the sources and a second application as a line source in the vagina, was used to deliver a further 20 Gy at 0.5 cm depth from the surface of the vagina. 5-FU was given as an infusion from days 1 to 4 inclusive and on treatment days 22 to 25 inclusive.  *eos Where possible, chemotherapy infusion was given on four consecutive days without a weekend break.  *eos If a weekend break was necessary, the infusion was only given on radiotherapy treatment days.  *eos In the latter years of the study, the 5-FU infusion was given in the outpatient setting by continuous infusion pump.  *eos Appropriate guidelines for 5-FU dosage reduction or elimination were recommended for hematologic or mucosal toxicity, but RT interruptions were not.  *eos 

Statistical Methods and Study Design. *eos The outcomes of interest in this study were pelvic control, survival, and disease-free survival, as well as the serious late complication rate.  *eos Figure 1 demonstrates the study design, the four-arm study was designed to determine whether any significant differences in outcome were evident between arms (a) and (d) and to be explanatory with respect to causation.  *eos Two factors were altered in arm (d) compared to standard arm (a), (1) the addition of 5-FU, (2) the change in radiation fractionation scheme.  *eos If differences were to be observed in pelvic control and survival in arm (d) versus arm (a), this could be due to a change in either or both factors.  *eos A factorial design was planned to test to what degree observed differences were attributable to either factor.  *eos Assuming that the magnitude and direction of the 5-FU effects were similar in arms (b) and (d) then the effect of the addition of 5-FU could be tested by comparing arms (b) and (d) with arms (a) and (c).  *eos The reduced fraction size in arms (c) and (d) was designed to attempt to take advantage of knowledge of the affect of fraction size on late complications and to determine whether complication rates were decreased by using decreased fraction size.  *eos Additionally, the changed fractionation scheme with delivery of two fractions daily at the beginning and end of therapy was designed to maximize the potential for interaction between 5-FU and radiation and to potentially reduce complication rates.  *eos The effect of the fractionation was to be tested by comparing arms (c) and (d) with arms (a) and (b) (Fig. 1).  *eos In order to detect a 20% improvement in pelvic control rate from an expected 50% for arm (a) to 70% for arm (d) assuming an alpha of 0.05 and beta of 0.20, 73 patients in each of four treatment arms would be required for a total of 292 patients.  *eos In order to detect an improvement of 15% in survival in arms (c) and (d) compared to that seen in arms (a) and (b), assuming a 40% cause-specific survival rate in arm (a) and an alpha of 0.05 and beta of 0.2, the total number of patients required was 272. *eos 

The Lifetest Procedure in SAS UNIX was used to compare survival curves.  *eos This procedure uses the KaplanMeier method that calculates the ranked test pooled across the strata adjusting for strata differences.  *eos Additionally, statistics testing homogeneity over strata were computed and checked.  *eos The KaplanMeier method was used to calculate median follow-up duration, censoring patients who died.  *eos Coxs proportional hazards model was used to examine the variables which might contribute to pelvic control or survival within stratum 1.  *eos Where information was missing for some parameters, single models were fitted for these parameters.  *eos Where the data were complete, the stepwise regression method was used to identify the relevant prognostic factors.  *eos Because patient accrual slowed considerably in the latter years of the study due to multiple factors including a decline in eligible patients, the study was terminated prior to reaching the planned accrual goal. *eos 

Complications. *eos Complications were considered acute and severe if occurring during or within 3 months from the end of radiation therapy and requiring hospitalization, e.g., diarrhea.  *eos Severe late or chronic bowel symptoms were those of fistula, perforation, stricture, or obstruction requiring hospitalization or surgery and bleeding requiring transfusion.  *eos Severe bladder symptoms were any condition requiring surgery, e.g., fistula, or hematuria requiring transfusion.  *eos Oral mucositis due to 5-FU was graded on a scale of 0 to 4, (1) pain without frank ulceration, (2) ulceration present but able to eat, (3) ulceration requiring a liquid diet, (4) alimentation not possible.  *eos Cytopenias were classed as grade 3 if bleeding or infection/fever occurred due to low blood counts and grade 2 if neutrophils were less than 1000 units/L or platelets less than 50,000 units/L.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Of the 234 patients randomized, 221 were evaluable.  *eos Thereasons for exclusion were the presence of extrapelvic disease at presentation in 7, patient refusal after randomization in 4, and missing chart/information in 2.  *eos The number excluded in each stratum were 6 in stratum 1, 3 in stratum 2, and 4 in stratum 3.  *eos The median age of the patients was 48 years with a range of 23 to 85 years.  *eos For strata 1 and 2 the distribution of FIGO stage, tumor size, nodal involvement on lymphography, tumor grade, and capillary lymphatic space involvement (CLS) for each treatment are shown in Tables 1 and 2.  *eos Ninety-nine patients were in stratum 1, of which 46 were stage IB/IIA and 53 were stage IIB.  *eos One hundred and five were in stratum 2, of which 38 were stage IIB and 63 stage IIIB.  *eos Only 17 were instratum 3.  *eos In view of the small number of patients in stratum 3, a detailed breakdown of possible tumor prognostic factors is not shown.  *eos The median duration of follow-up for the whole population is 59 months (95% confidence interval, 57 to 66 months).  *eos The median size of tumor was 6.5 cm (range 3.5 to 18 cm).  *eos The median tumor size in stratum 1 of 6 cm was large despite the relatively earlier FIGO stage compared to stratum 2.  *eos The median tumor size in stratum 2 was 7 cm. *eos 

One hundred and ninety of 221 patients received external beam radiation using the box technique, while 31 were treated with a parallel pair.  *eos Intracavitary radiation was used in all but 19 of the 221 patients.  *eos Compliance with the planned radiation schedules was good.  *eos In the standard arm (a), 53 of 54 received the prescribed tumor dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions.  *eos In the partially hyperfractionated irradiation arm (c), two patients had radiation dose violations, one a dose of 50 Gy in 25 fractions and the other a dose of 59 Gy in 33 fractions.  *eos In the standard radiation plus 5-FU arm (b), 52 of the 53 patients received the standard dose prescription.  *eos In the partially hyperfractionated RT with 5-FU arm (d), 3 of 58 received nonprescribed doses of 46 Gy to 52 Gy in 29 to 32 fractions.  *eos Of the 23 patients who received no intracavitary radiation or doses less than 500 cGy, there was a relatively even distribution across the treatment arms with 5 in arm (a), 5 in arm (b), 3 in arm (c), and 9 in arm (d).  *eos Seven of these 23 patients received a compensatory boost of external radiation in doses of 6 to 16 Gy. *eos 

The histopathology was not centrally reviewed.  *eos One hundred and eighty-seven of 221 patients had squamous cell carcinoma, 17 adenocarcinoma, 12 adenosquamous, and the remainder clear cell or unclassified.  *eos Tumor was grade 1 in 8 of 221 (4%), grade 2 in 106 of 221 (48%), and grade 3 in 75 of the 221 (34%).  *eos Grade was not stated in 32 of 221.  *eos Capillary lymphatic space (CLS) involvement was commented on in 146 of 221 (66%).  *eos CLS involvement was found in 34 of the 146 (23%).  *eos Compliance with planned chemotherapy administration was good.  *eos Of the patients randomized to receive standard radiation with 5-FU, four received no chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course.  *eos In patients randomized to receive hyperfractionated irradiation and 5-FU, three received no chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course. *eos 

Pelvic Control and Survival. *eos With a median duration of follow-up of 59 months, 119 of 221 patients are alive, 111 without evidence of disease, and 8 with disease present.  *eos Eighty-four have died of disease and 4 have died of other causes with disease present.  *eos For the purpose of analysis, the latter group are considered dead of disease.  *eos One patient died of complications and 13 died of causes other than disease or complications.  *eos Twelve patients are lost to follow-up, 6 with a duration of less than 2 years, 4 with less than 3 years, and 2 with less than 5 years.  *eos Table 3 shows the KaplanMeier estimates of 5-year disease-free survival and pelvic control for each stratum.  *eos The KaplanMeier plots of overall disease-free survival, disease-free survival for each stratum, and disease free survival by treatment assigned are shown in Figs. 2, 3, and4, respectively.  *eos There is no significant difference in the overall 5-year disease-free survival between the treatment arms.  *eos Thereis a trend in favor of standard radiation and 5-FU.  *eos The disease free 5-year survival in arm (a), (c), (d), and (b), respectively,were 45, 53, 58, and 61%.  *eos The overall pelvic control by treatment assigned for arms (a), (c), (d), and (b) was 58, 65, 68, and 69%, respectively.  *eos Whereas there was once again a trend in favor of concurrent 5-FU, particularly in combination with standard radiation, the difference was not statistically significant.  *eos The disease-free survival by treatment arm for the 99 patients in stratum 1 is shown in Fig. 5.  *eos There was a significant improvement in 5-year survival and disease-free survival for those treated with standard radiation and 5-FU compared to the other treatments (log rank test P 5 0.05).  *eos The actuarial 5-year disease-free survival was 76% compared to 65% for hyperfractionated irradiation plus 5-FU, 58% for hyperfractionated irradiation alone, and 39% for standard radiation.  *eos Similar differences were observed in pelvic control, but the addition of 5-FU to standard radiation resulted in a greater improvement in disease-free survival than in pelvic control.  *eos Table 4.  *eos A factorial analysis of the magnitude of the impact of differences in the radiation schedule or the addition of 5-FU on the improvements in pelvic control and disease-free survival in stratum 1 was performed.  *eos In examining the effect of the addition of 5-FU on disease-free survival in stratum 1, there is a highly significant difference in favor of the use of 5-FU regardless of the radiation employed.  *eos The 5-year KaplanMeier disease-free survival for those irradiated without 5-FU was 48% versus 71% for those who received 5-FU (log rank P 5 0.02) (Fig. 6).  *eos Pelvic control was 66% for those who did not receive 5-FU compared to 84% for those who did (P 5 0.07).  *eos However, in evaluating the importance of the contribution of the change in fractionation to the differences observed, there was no significant difference in the 5-year survival of those treated on standard radiation versus those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation whether or not 5-FU was used.  *eos When the radiation fraction size is reduced as in this altered fractionation scheme a compensatory increase in total dose over the same overall time is required to reach a biologically similar dose.  *eos The dose of 5280 cGy in 33 fractions is biologically similar to the standard dose of 5000 cGy in 25 fractions.  *eos It was hoped that the use of two treatments daily during the 5-FU infusion would increase any opportunity for 5-FU-radiation interaction by increasing the total amount of radiation given concurrently with 5-FU.  *eos The 5-year KaplanMeier survival was 62% for those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation and was not significantly different from the 58% survival of those treated with standard irradiation.  *eos The observed differences in pelvic control and survival in favor of the standard radiation and concurrent 5-FU associated with the addition of 5-FU rather than the change in radiation schedule. *eos 

Stratum 2 was examined for differences in pelvic control and survival between the treatment arms and no significant differences were observed.  *eos There were too few patients in stratum 3 to do valid statistical analyses.  *eos Since significant differences in pelvic control and survival were observed in stratum 1 which contained only 99 patients, it is important to examine whether there was an uneven distribution of other possible patient or tumor-related prognostic factors across the treatment arms to account for the differences observed.  *eos We wished to determine whether there was an accumulation of bad risk factors in the group receiving standard radiation alone or alternatively that there was an accumulation of good risk factors in patients receiving standard RT and 5-FU.  *eos For those receiving standard RT, the pelvic control rate was 60% but the disease-free survival was only 39%.  *eos Table 1 shows the distribution of identifiable possible prognostic factors by treatment assigned.  *eos There appears to be no imbalance in the distribution by FIGO stage, cell type or CLS involvement.  *eos If anything, there was a slight excess of larger tumors in those receiving standard radiation and 5-FU, the arm with the best outcomes.  *eos The time to development of serious late complications was seven to 53 months (median 16 months).  *eos Eight occurred in those receiving standard radiation and five in those receiving altered RT.  *eos There was no apparent increase in late complications associated with the addition of 5-FU.  *eos Seven occurred in the group receiving 5-FU and six in those without 5-FU.  *eos Serious complications resolved (obstruction resolved or colostomy closed) in all but four of the patients.  *eos Given the low incidence of late complications it is not possible to establish an actuarial probability of risk with these regimens.  *eos The crude incidence of 5.9% (13 of 221) presents a good estimate of the overall risk for chronic bowel complications in survivors, since most occur in the first 3 years after radiation therapy.  *eos The median duration of follow up on this series at 59 months is sufficient to observe approximately 80% of expected events. *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos Other than the report on the use of concurrent hydroxyurea this is the first published report of the results of a randomized study examining the role of concurrent chemotherapy and radiation in advanced cervical cancer.  *eos To reach the conclusion that concurrent chemotherapy truly adds benefit to results achievable with radiation alone, it is important that the radiation be delivered in an optimal manner with adequate doses at Point A (80 to 90 Gy) and limited overall treatment times.  *eos The radiation scheme used in this study conforms to those guidelines, although the inability to apply intracavitary radiation in 10% of these patients with advanced disease wasdisappointing. *eos 

The rationale for the use of concurrent infusional 5-FU and the treatment regimens studied has been discussed in detail in a previous publication.  *eos Patients were stratified into three groups in this study because pelvic control and survival outcomes are strongly influenced by the bulk of pelvic disease, declining with increasing bulk.  *eos The specific strata selected were based on previous retrospective data indicating significantly different prognoses for these specific clinical groupings of bulk of pelvic disease.  *eos The original design for this study required 292 patients with adequate power to detect a 15% difference in pelvic control and survival.  *eos Unfortunately, because accrual was protracted and declined in the latter years of the study, the study was closed prematurely with 234 patients accrued.  *eos It is therefore not surprising that significant differences in survival and pelvic control were not observed in the overall population.  *eos However, given the observation of a consistent trend in favor of standard RT plus 5-FU it was felt justified to perform an exploratory subset analysis of each stratum.  *eos It was anticipated that the magnitude of benefit might vary for each stratum.  *eos There were too few patients (17) in stratum 3 to justify further analysis.  *eos In strata 1 and 2 there were sufficient patients to perform exploratory analyses.  *eos Within stratum 2 there was an improvement in pelvic control with the use of 5-FU but the difference was not statistically significant.  *eos However, in stratum 1 constituted of patients with stage IB/IIA and those IIB tumors with medial parametrial involvement, a significant improvement in both pelvic control and disease-free survival in favor of standard radiation with concurrent 5-FU was observed (Figs. 5 and 6).  *eos The disease-free survival with standard radiation alone, however, was surprisingly low at 39%.  *eos A factorial analysis compared the outcome for all patients treated with concurrent 5-FU compared to those without 5-FU.  *eos A similar analysis compared all those treated with standard radiation to those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation.  *eos The benefits observed occurred in relation to the use of concurrent 5-FU rather than to the change in radiation fractionation.  *eos The direction of benefit in favor of 5-FU with standard radiation compared to the other treatments was the same in strata 1 and 2.  *eos Because of the small numbers in each treatment arm it was surprising to observe a significant difference.  *eos With so few randomized the possibility exists that an imbalance in prognostic factors exists between the treatment arms might account for the observed outcome differences.  *eos A number of patient- and tumor-related factors were analyzed for their impact on outcome using the Coxs proportional hazard model.  *eos The tumor- and patient-related factors examined were FIGO stage (IB versus IIA versus IIB), size of tumor (greater or less than 6 cm and greater or less than 7 cm), grade of tumor the presence or absence of capillary-like space involvement, nodal involvement, and patient age as a continuous variable.  *eos The treatment related factors examined were the use of intracavitary radiation, the use of 5-FU, and the fractionation scheme, standard versus partially hyperfractionated.  *eos Unfortunately the data are not yet available to analyze the impact of variability in overall treatment time.  *eos The only significant factor predicting for disease-free survival was the use of 5-FU.  *eos The risk ratio for recurrence and death from disease was reduced to 0.49 (95% confidence interval 0.25 to 0.97).  *eos Thus, there is no obvious explanation for the differences observed other than a treatment effect from the 5-FU.  *eos With so few patients, however, there may still be a maldistribution of some unrecognized tumor or patient-related prognostic factor which could be responsible for the differences observed. *eos 

The changed fractionation scheme, using smaller than conventional fraction sizes and a 6% increase in total dose was designed to be approximately biologically equivalent for tumor control to that of standard radiation yet lead to reduced complications.  *eos The overall incidence of serious complications was too low to detect differences between the treatment arms.  *eos The observed complication rate in any of the treatment arms appears acceptable, 7% with standard radiation whether or not 5-FU was added and 4% in the hyperfractionated radiation arms whether or not 5-FU was added. *eos 

The second rationale for use of the partially hyperfractionated radiation scheme was to attempt to maximize the dose of radiation delivered during the infusion of 5-FU.  *eos Two fractions of 160 cGy per day were delivered during the infusion at the beginning and end of treatment in arm (d).  *eos Hyperfractionated radiation and 5-FU should theoretically have offered a benefit over that of standard radiation and 5-FU if increased tumor cell kill results from any interaction between the modalities.  *eos Such a benefit was not observed in this study.  *eos Theoretical explanations for the lack of benefit may include a reduction in tumor cell kill due to the reduced radiation fraction size and/or an insufficient compensatory increase in total dose to compensate for the reduced fraction size.  *eos The mechanism by which 5-FU exerts benefit is unknown, but may be simply by additivity due to its independent cytotoxic effect rather than to an interaction with radiation. *eos 

The lack of significant benefit for 5-FU in stratum 2 may be due to the small sample size or, theoretically, that the added chemotherapy was insufficient to significantly impact on more advanced disease.  *eos The observation that 5-FU impacted more on survival than pelvic control in stratum 1 is difficult to explain.  *eos It was not expected that the 5-FU dosage would be sufficient to directly reduce distant micrometastases.  *eos An alternative explanation is that 5-FU contributed to pelvic control and better pelvic control decreased the frequency of distant metastases. *eos 

From the subset analysis of this trial we have generated the hypothesis that there may be a beneficial effect of adding concurrent infusional 5-FU to standard in patients with the disease characteristics of stratum 1.  *eos Since the data are not conclusive because of limited numbers, confirmation of the beneficial effects observed in this study is necessary.  *eos The number of patients is too few to recommend that concurrent infusional 5-FU with pelvic irradiation should become the standard therapy for these patients. *eos 

Other completed or ongoing randomized studies of the Gynecologic Oncology Group (protocols 85 and 120) and of the NCI Canada examine concurrent radiation and cisplatin or cisplatin combinations with 5-FU.  *eos The results of these additional studies will be influential in confirming whether the strategy of concurrent chemotherapy and radiation is beneficial for patients with advanced cervical cancer. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1117</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos Stage Ib and IIa carcinoma of the cervix can be cured by radical surgery or radiotherapy with similar effectiveness, but the rate and types of complications differ.  *eos Radiotherapy is feasible and effective in almost all patients, 5-year survival after this therapy ranges from 78% to 91%.  *eos By contrast, radical surgery affords the opportunity to study pathological findings, so that groups of at-risk patients who could benefit from adjuvant treatment can be identified.  *eos The 5-year cure rate after surgery for early-stage cervical tumours ranges from 54% to 90%, in most cases this rate is achieved with adjuvant therapy.  *eos The treatment of choice will depend on the policy of the institution, the gynaecologist or radiation oncologist involved, and the age and the general health of the patient. *eos 

Apart from Newtons study about stage-I diseases, there have been no randomised studies to compare radiotherapy with radical surgery in one institution over a short period of time.  *eos We conducted a prospective, randomised study to compare external and internal radiotherapy with radical hysterectomy and node dissection.  *eos Our main aim was to evaluate 5-year survival and the rate and pattern of complications and recurrences associated with each procedure. *eos 

Methods. *eos Between September, 1986, and December, 1991, 578 patients with primary invasive cervical cancer were referred to the Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Radiation Oncology, at the Istituto di Scienze Biomediche S Gerardo, University of Milan, Monza.  *eos All patients received standard pretreatment evaluation, which included complete blood analysis, intravenous pyelogram, lymphangiography, cystoscopy, chest radiography, and other tests when indicated.  *eos The cervical diameter was assessed by alginate mould. *eos 

We used the International Federation of Gynaecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) clinical staging system to classify the stage of cancer.7 If there was disagreement about the stage, the case was assigned to the earlier stage. 468 patients had FIGO stage Ib or IIa disease. 343 of these patients were enrolled after they had given their informed consent to take part.  *eos Eligibility criteria were, age 3070 years, newly diagnosed stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer, no concurrent or previous malignant disease, WHO performance status of 1 or less, and feasibility of both radical surgery and radiotherapy.  *eos The clinical evaluation of the patients was done by the gynaecological surgeon together with the radiation oncologist to avoid bias in the randomisation, in fact, patients with unfavourable clinical characteristics are usually treated by radiotherapy alone. *eos 

The patients were randomly assigned radical surgery (n=172) or radical radiotherapy (n=171).  *eos Patients were also stratified by cervical diameter (4 cm or >4 cm).  *eos Treatment was assigned by block randomisation (clusters of ten cases of each stratum of cervical diameter) from a computer-generated table that had been created before the start of the study.  *eos The treatments in thetable were coded so that no-one could discover treatment allocation before randomisation.  *eos The codes were revealed after we had obtained the patients informed consent.  *eos Radiotherapy included, external pelvic irradiation with 18 MV photon beam by the multiportal technique, one dose of 1820Gy at the isocentre, and two or more portals treated daily.  *eos The median total dose of radiation was 47 (range 4053) Gy during 35 weeks, depending on the tumour volume and nodal status.  *eos After 2 weeks, one caesium-137 LDR insertion was carried out.  *eos A complete computerised plane was made, according to the International Commission on Radiation Units and Measurements report no 38.8 The total dose at point A (external beam plus brachyradiotherapy) ranged from 70 Gy to 90 Gy (median 76 Gy).  *eos The total dose to the pelvic wall exceeded 50 Gy, an additional dose was administered to the parametria by external beam if necessary.  *eos When lymphangiography showed common iliac or paraortic metastases, paraortic lymph nodes were treated with a dose of 45 Gy over 5 weeks and two shaped opposed fields (AP-PA).  *eos A boost of 510 Gy was given to the positive nodes. *eos 

Radical surgery consisted of a class III radical abdominal hysterectomy, as described by Piver and co-workers.  *eos In all cases, a lower midline incision was made, which skirted the umbilicus and extended to the cephalad when indicated.  *eos Dissection of the pelvic lymph node consisted of removal of all fatty lymph-node bearing tissue anterior, lateral, and posterior to the common,external, and internal iliac vessels, and anterior to the obturator nerve.  *eos In cases of enlarged paraortic nodes, only sampling or selective procedures were done.  *eos In patients aged 40 years or younger with squamous histology, one ovary was preserved and suspended to the ipsilateral paracolic space outside the pelvis.  *eos The pathologist provided us with histological subtypes, grade, depth of invasion, tumour size, presence of capillary-like-space involvement, paracervical-tissue involvement, and number, site, and type of lymph-node metastases.  *eos Patients who had at least one of the following pathological risk factors received adjuvant radiotherapy, surgical stage greater than pT2a, less than 3 mm of uninvolved cervical stroma, cutthrough, and lymph-node metastases.  *eos Adjuvant radiotherapy consisted of external pelvic irradiation (18 MV X-rays) with the multiportal technique, one fraction of 1820 Gy daily, with a total dose of 504 Gy over 56 weeks.  *eos The paraortic region was irradiated in case of metastases in the surgical specimen in common iliac or paraortic nodes with a dose of 45 Gy over 5 weeks. *eos 

The primary outcome measures were 5-year overall survival and the rate of complications.  *eos The secondary outcome measure was recurrence of the disease.  *eos We classified complications as, grade 1, mild symptoms not affecting the patients health and easily cured, grade 2, symptoms that can be resolved by long-term medical therapies, grade 3, major symptoms that require surgery or invasive procedures and affect the performance status of the patient, or fatal complications. *eos 

Statistical analysis. *eos The minimum detectable difference in survival and morbidity was defined as 15% for =005 and 1-=80%.  *eos No interim analysis was done.  *eos We used 2 test with Yates continuity correction to test the association between discrete variables.  *eos We compared quantitative data by one-way analysis of variance.  *eos Survival curves were calculated by the life-table method and compared by the log-rank test.  *eos A significance level of 95% was chosen.  *eos Survival and relapses were analysed by intention to treat. *eos 

We analysed the rate of complications by the actual treatment delivered to each patient so that we could assess accurately the type and cause of morbidity associated with each treatment.  *eos We used multivariate Cox regression analysis to assess the effect of cervical size, age, FIGO state, histological type, grade of differentiation, radiological lymph-node status, and treatment group on overall survival.  *eos 

Results. *eos The trial profile shows the flow of patients in the study (figure 1).  *eos Of the 468 patients with FIGO stage Ib or IIa cervical cancer, 125 were excluded because of age (<30 years, >70 years, n=43), medical illness (n=54), previous or concurrent malignant disease (n=21), or the referring physicians or patients preference for surgery, radiotherapy, or chemoradiotherapy (n=7).  *eos Thus, 343 patients were randomised, 172 to radical surgery and 171 to radiotherapy.  *eos After randomisation, there were six protocol violations, two in the surgery group (one progression before operation and one refusal of any therapy after randomisation) and four in the radiotherapy group (two patients whose cancer was incorrectly staged and two with synchronous neoplasia).  *eos We excluded these cases from the analysis.  *eos Therefore 170 patients in the surgery group and 167 in the radiotherapy group were included in the intention-to-treat analysis. *eos 

Ten patients crossed over treatment, one refused surgery and was irradiated, and nine refused radiotherapy and underwent surgery.  *eos These cases were analysed according to the original group they were allocated to (intention to treat).  *eos Five patients in the radiotherapy group did not receive brachyradiotherapy after external irradiation because of unfavourable anatomy and subsequently underwent radical surgery.  *eos Thus, 169 in the surgery group and 158 in the radiotherapy group underwent the scheduled treatment (compliance of 98% for surgery and 92% for radiotherapy).  *eos There were no significant between-group differences in the distribution of factors affecting prognosis (table 1).  *eos The mean age of patients in the radiotherapy group was slightly greater than that of patients in the surgery group.  *eos Lymphangiography revealed positive nodes in 24 (14%) surgery-group patients and in 22 (13%) radiotherapy group patients.  *eos Six of the 24 surgery-group patients showed no lymph-node metastasis in the surgical specimen.  *eos Of the 145 surgery-group patients with negative lymphangiography, 27 had nodal metastases, which accounted for a specificity of 95% and a sensitivity of 40%.  *eos 

The distribution of pathological risk factors differed significantly according to cervical diameter, especially for surgical stage, cut-through, and lymph-vascular-space involvement (table 2).  *eos Adjuvant radiotherapy was done in 62 (54%) of the 114 surgery-group patients who had a cervical diameter of 4 cm or smaller and in 46 (84%) of 55 surgery-group patients who had a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm. 19 patients whose cervical diameter was 4 cm or less and three patients whose cervical diameter was greater than 4 cm had lymph-vascular-space involvement as the only pathological risk factor, these patients did not receive postoperative irradiation. *eos 

Survival and recurrence. *eos Median follow-up was 87 (range 57120) months.  *eos No patient was lost to follow-up. 11 patients died of intercurrent disease and two from fatal complications (bowel perforation and pulmonary embolism).  *eos The overall crude survival for all patients included in the intention-to-treat analysis was 765% (258 of 337).  *eos The status of the patients according to primary therapy and cervical diameter is shown in table 3.  *eos The overall and disease-free actuarial 5-year survival for all patients were 83% and 74%, respectively, and did not differ significantly between the groups (figure 2). 5-year actuarial survival stratified by cervical diameter was similar in the surgery and radiotherapy groups (diameter < 4 cm, 87% vs 90%, diameter >4 cm, 70% vs 72%, figure 3, table 3). 5-year actuarial disease-free survival for the surgery and radiotherapy groups was 80% and 82%, respectively, for patients whose cervical diameter was 4 cm or smaller, and 63% and 57% for those with a diameter larger than 4 cm, the between group differences were not significant.  *eos The two groups did not differ significantly as regards squamous histotype, overall 5-year survival rates were 84% in surgery-group patients and 88% in radiotherapy-group patients, overall disease-free survival was 76% and 78%, respectively.  *eos For rates of adenocarcinoma there was a significant advantage for patients who had surgery compared with those who had radiotherapy in both overall survival (70% vs 59%, p=005) and disease-free survival (66% vs 47%, p=002).  *eos Results of univariate and multivariate analysis are shown in table 4.  *eos Significant factors in both univariate and multivariate analyses were cervical diameter, positive lymphangiography, and adenocarcinomatous histotype.  *eos Overall survival for the 108 surgery-group patients who received adjuvant treatment (high-risk group) compared with the patients with surgery alone (low-risk group) or radiotherapy alone (unknown risk) is shown in figure 4, *eos 

Overall, 86 (255%) patients developed recurrent disease, 42 (25%) in the surgery group and 44 (26%) in the radiotherapy group.  *eos Of these 86 patients, 60 (70%) died of disease.  *eos Six patients were still alive with disease 418 months after the diagnosis of relapse.  *eos Three patients with recurrence died of intercurrent disease (one after successful treatment of the recurrence).  *eos Among the patients who developed recurrent disease, six (14%) in the surgery group and 13 (30%) in the radiotherapy group were cured, this difference was not significant (p=015).  *eos The median time to recurrence did not differ significantly between the surgery and radiotherapy groups (20 vs 18 months, p=024). 82% of pelvic recurrences and 61% of the distant ones became evident within 2 years of the primary treatment.  *eos Of the 86 patients who developed a recurrence, 50 (58%) had local or pelvic recurrence (22 [52%] in the surgery group vs 28 [64%] in the radiotherapy group, p=042), and 36 (42%) had distant metastases (20 [48%] vs 16 [36%], p=062), five of these 36 patients also had a pelvic recurrence.  *eos However, when cervical diameter was taken into account, there were substantial between-group differences in pelvic recurrence.  *eos In particular, among radiotherapy-group patients with cervical diameter larger than 4 cm, the rate of pelvic relapse was more than twofold the rate of distant relapses (30% vs 13%).  *eos In addition, among women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm, there was a significantly higher rate of pelvic relapse among those who had radiotherapy than among those who had surgery plus adjuvant irradiation (16 [70%] vs 9 [53%], p=046).  *eos 

Complications. *eos Patients who had a treatment crossover were excludedfrom the analysis because the same factors that induced the treatment crossover could have affected the subsequent morbidity.  *eos Thus, 169 patients in the surgery group and 158 in the radiotherapy group were included in this analysis.  *eos Complications were classified according to the glossary of Chassagne and colleagues.10 In the surgery group, 48 (28%) patients showed severe (grade 23) morbidity that required medical or surgical treatment, compared with 19 (12%) patients in the radiotherapy group, (p=00004, table 3).  *eos Grade 2 or 3 complications affected 19 (31%) patients who had surgery alone and 29 (27%) patients who received surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy (p=071).  *eos The sum of the short-term and long-term complications exceeds the total number of complications because some of the patients had multiple morbidity.  *eos Two deaths were related to the primary treatment, both in the surgery group, ileal spontaneous perforation (11 months after adjuvant radiotherapy) and pulmonary embolism (17 days after surgery).  *eos This accounts for an overall mortality rate of 06%.  *eos Three (17%) surgery-group patients had perioperative complications, one vascular lesion during lymphadenectomy, one postoperative ureterovaginal fistula, and one fatal pulmonary embolism.  *eos Hydroureteronephrosis was recorded in, two (3%) of 61 patients who had surgery alone, 11 (10%) of 108 patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy, and eight (5%) of 158 patients who had radiotherapy alone (p=01).  *eos The relative risk of this complication for surgery plus radiotherapy versus surgery alone was 311 (95% CI 0711356) and was 201 (95% CI 08448%) for surgery plus radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone.  *eos Positioning of ureteral catheter or nephtostomy was needed, respectively, in two (100%), three (27%), and five (62%) patients with hydroureteronephrosis in the three above-mentioned groups.  *eos Chronic neurological bladder was observed in eight (13%) patients who had surgery alone and in five (5%) patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy.  *eos Other vesical complications (severe actinic cystitis, stress incontinence, high-pressure bladder) were recorded in two (3%) patients after surgery, 11 (10%) after surgery plus radiotherapy, and in eight (5%) after radiotherapy alone.  *eos Ileal obstruction occurred in six (5%) patients who underwent surgery plus radiotherapy and in two (1%) who received radical radiotherapy.  *eos In the radiotherapy group, one patient had intestinal perforation, one rectovaginal fistula, and 12 severe proctites.Severe oedema of the legs occurred in ten (9%) patients who had surgery plus radiotherapy, in one (06%) patient who had radiotherapy alone, and in none of the patients who had surgery alone.  *eos Pelvic lymphocyst occurred in five (8%) patients after surgery and in five (15%) after surgery plus radiotherapy.  *eos Abdominal hernia occurred in seven patients, of whom four received surgery alone and three received surgery plus radiotherapy. *eos 

Discussion. *eos Our review of the published research suggests that cure rates are similar for patients with stage-I cervical cancers who undergo surgery or radiotherapy.  *eos Newton5 reported that the 5-year survival rate for 119 patients with stage-I disease accrued over 10 years in a partly randomised study was 81% for radical surgery and 74% for radiotherapy, this difference was not significant.  *eos Morley and Seskis study, of 446 patients with stage-Ib disease recruited between 1945 and 1975 and treated with radical hysterectomy and bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy or external irradiation and brachyradiotherapy, reported crude 5-year survival of 87% and 83%, respectively.  *eos 

These rates suggest that both treatments are equally effective for early-stage cancers (Ib and IIa).  *eos In our study, 5-year actuarial survival was the same in the surgery and radiation groups (83%), which suggests that there is no treatment of choice with respect to local control of disease.  *eos Apart from survival, optimum treatment strategies depend on the benefits and disadvantages of each treatment and on prognostic factors (cervical diameter, histotype, and lymph-node status).  *eos Age is also an important factor, in most cases, cervical carcinomas occur in middle-aged women.  *eos Radical hysterectomy allows the gonadal function of at least one ovary to be saved, thereby avoiding the effects of early menopause in younger women.  *eos Shortening and fibrosis of the vagina can be limited if the woman is sexually active.  *eos Most complications can be easily corrected.  *eos Surgery also offers other advantages, pelvic relapses can be successfully cured by radiotherapy, whereas salvage surgery after primary irradiation carries a high rate of failures and severe morbidity.  *eos Furthermore, surgery allows the status of the lymph nodes, the most dependent variable associated with survival, to be assessed accurately.  *eos By contrast, radiotherapy is easier to deliver for patients who are obese, are elderly, or have severe illnessmajor contraindications to the surgical approach.  *eos Radiotherapy also avoids the risks of anaesthesia and the laparotomy scar, and iatrogenic mortality is rare.  *eos Complications after radiotherapy arise later than after surgery, although radiotherapy-related complications are often permanent.  *eos 

Morbidity is associated with both treatment strategies, though the most severe complications, such as operative mortality, urological complications, and tissue damage from irradiation, have been reduced during the past 20 years.  *eos In our experience, the combination of surgery and adjuvant radiotherapy carries the worst morbidity, especially long-term (delayed in onset) complications, that are difficult to record during the follow-up.  *eos Hydroureteronephroses, oedema of the lower limbs, various vesical complications, and bowel morbidity are more common and compromising in women who undergo surgery plus radiotherapy.  *eos On the other hand, the low rate of major complications after radiotherapy (12%) suggests that this approach is well-tolerated by most patients. 25% of the surgery-group patients and 26% patients in the radiotherapy group developed neoplastic recurrence.  *eos The pelvic area (including vagina and cervix, when present) was involved in 22 (52%) of 42 relapses after surgery and in 28 (64%) of 44 relapses after radiotherapy.  *eos The women with a cervical diameter larger than 4 cm had the most unfavourable pathological prognostic factors and were at risk of a relapse independently from any other clinical factor.  *eos These data are confirmed by other previous studies.  *eos Adjuvant radiotherapy was prospectively planned in patients at high risk of relapse.  *eos Our study was not aimed to assess the usefulness of the postoperative treatment, though our finding that patients treated with surgery plus radiotherapy were exposed to early and late complicationsof both treatments is important.  *eos Clinical prognostic factors can prove useful to select those patients who should be treated primarily by irradiation, reserving surgery for patients who do not need adjuvant treatment. *eos 

In Italy, a prospective randomised trial has been under way since 1993 to assess the best adjuvant treatment (chemotherapy or radiotherapy) for high-risk patients after radical surgery for FIGO stage IbIIa cancer.  *eos Improvements in local control and survival could be achieved by combined treatments, which would avoid the discomforting complications associated with surgery plus radiotherapy.  *eos The most important clinical risk factors that could indicate benefit of combined treatments are cervical diameter and lymph node status as assessed by lymphangiography.  *eos Most women with stage IbIIa cervical cancer can be treated successfully with radiotherapy, whereas a judicious selection of patients is necessary before planning primary radical surgery.  *eos Histological type should be included in the selection criteria, because our data show that radiotherapy was less effective than surgery for adenocardinoma of the cervix.  *eos This finding should resolve some of the conflicting approaches to this issue.1416 Our results suggest that the optimum candidates for primary radical surgery are women with normal ovarian function and cervical diameters of 4 cm or smaller, whereas radiotherapy is preferable for postmenopausal women.  *eos Women whose cervical diameters are larger than 4 cm should be identified before surgery so that they can benefit from tailored treatment, radical radiotherapy, with the option of concomitant radiosensitising chemotherapy to improve the local control of the disease, or cisplatinbased chemotherapy followed by radical surgery.  *eos The latter approach offers the advantages of surgery, and the neoadjuvant chemotherapy will keep to a minimum the risk of extracervical spread of the tumour withoutcombining surgery and radiotherapy.  *eos An Italian prospective randomised trial of radical radiotherapy versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by surgery in patients with squamous neoplasia and cervical diameters larger than 4 cm has been in progress since 1991. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1118</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
INTRODUCTION. *eos Over the past several decades, the prognosis of patients with locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix has been poor, particularly for those with bulky local tumors and extensive parametrial extension.  *eos The treatment of choice for advanced cervical carcinoma has traditionally been radiotherapy alone.  *eos The incidence of failure to control pelvic disease following radical irradiation is about 40%.  *eos This is associated with a high incidence of distant metastasis, in which 30% of patients subsequently developed metastases either alone or in combination with pelvic failure.  *eos While no therapy has been proven more effective than radical external-beam plus intracavitary radiotherapy, considerable research effort, including addition of chemotherapy plus radiation, is currently being put into improving survival rate in patients with advanced carcinoma of the cervix.  *eos The rationale for adding chemotherapy to pelvic radiation is to provide systemic cytotoxic agents active against cervical cancer with the potential to enhance the radiosensitivity, to enhance local tumor control, and to eradicate micrometastasis.  *eos Recently, a variety of studies have investigated how chemotherapy may be integrated into the management of patients with advanced cervical cancer.  *eos The use of concurrent chemoradiotherapy has shown promising therapeutic results in a variety of tumors.  *eos The concurrent use of radiation and chemotherapy, either as a single agent or in combination, has also been demonstrated to be effective in the local control of advanced carcinoma of the cervix with acceptable toxicity as presented by several reports, and was also supported by our previous phase I and II trial.  *eos However, most series were nonrandomized and failed to achieve an improvement in long-term survival.  *eos Therefore, to further test the hypothesis, a definitive statement about the optimal management in this situation required a prospective, randomized trial.  *eos Thus, we designed the randomized trial to compare the tumor response and survival rate of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma receiving concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus patients receiving radiotherapy alone.  *eos The purpose of this randomized trial was to assess whether the chemoradiation is better than radiotherapy alone for locally advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos We also compared the toxicity of the two compared groups after planned treatment. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Trial Design. *eos This study was designed as a randomized, phase III trial conducted at the Chang Gung Memorial Hospital in Taiwan.  *eos From October 1990 to April 1995, patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered on the study and randomly assigned to either radiotherapy or concurrent chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Before randomization, patients were stratified by stage (stage IIb bulky versus stage IIIB).  *eos The trial compared the efficacy and tolerability of concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy versus radiotherapy alone for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer.  *eos 

Patients. *eos A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were included in this study.  *eos Patients with previously untreated stage IIb bulky or stage IIIb advanced cervical carcinoma were eligible for study.  *eos Other eligibility criteria consisted of a pathologically verified squamous cell carcinoma of the cervix, a Karnofsky performance status index of 80% or above, and an age of younger than 70 years.  *eos Patients with stage IIB tumors had to have bulky tumors larger than 4 cm and extensive parametrial invasion.  *eos The patients could have no history of previous malignancy, chemotherapy, or radiotherapy.  *eos Adequate hepatic, renal, and cardiopulmonary functions were essential.  *eos Informed consents were obtained from all patients, and the study protocol was approved by the Protocol Committee of Chang Gung Memorial Hospital.  *eos The disease was staged according to the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) in 1991.  *eos Pretreatment evaluation included a complete medical history and physical examination, complete blood count, serum electrolytes, chemistry profile, tumor markers, chest X ray, an electrocardiogram, and contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis.  *eos All patients had protoscopy, cystoscopy, bone scan, and biopsy of any suspected lesions.  *eos Patients with radiographically suspicious paraaortic lymph nodes underwent a CT-guided percutaneous needle aspiration of the node.  *eos Extraperitoneal staging laparotomy was performed if aspiration cytology was negative.  *eos Any enlarged or suspicious nodes were excised and sent for histopathologic interpretation.  *eos Patients with documented disease beyond the pelvis were excluded, as were patients with positive paraaortic lymph nodes.  *eos 

Treatment Plan. *eos Eligible patients were randomized to receive concurrent chemoradiotherapy or radiation therapy alone.  *eos In the radiation group, patients received external beam X-ray treatment followed by intracavitary brachytherapy.  *eos External beam irradiation was started on Day 1 and delivered using a linear accelerator of 10-MV photons to the whole pelvis using a four-field box technique.  *eos A dose of 4400 cGy was delivered in 22 equal fractions over 30 to 35 days.  *eos This was followed by six courses of intracavitary brachytherapy 1 to 2 weeks after external beam radiotherapy was completed.  *eos Treatment was given using a remote-control afterloading system to give 430 cGy at point A in each intracavitary brachytherapy, as described previously.  *eos In the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group, chemotherapeutic regimens consisted of cisplatin (50 mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously at the rate of 1 mg/min on Day 1), vincristine (1 mg/m2 intravenously push on Day 2), and bleomycin (25 mg/m2 body-surface area intravenously infusion in divided doses on Days 2, 3, and 4) which were given starting on Day 1 of radiotherapy and then every 3 weeks for a total of four courses.  *eos Antiemetic treatment was given before and after cisplatinum-based chemotherapy.  *eos Flexible granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) 2 mg/kg/day administration was used to prevent neutropenia and further infection.  *eos The patients had to have a white-cell count of at least 3000/m3 and a platelet count of at least 100,000/m3 before the next course could be administered.  *eos Chemotherapy was to be delayed week by week until the neutrophil count recovered to 1500/ml, platelet count recovered to 100,000/ml.  *eos Cisplatin was to be delayed if serum creatinine levels did not return to 1.5 mg/dl, and creatinine clearance to 60 ml/min.  *eos If this delay exceeded 3 weeks, the patient was withdrawn from the study.  *eos The local response to treatment was evaluated at 1 month after completion of therapy by physical examination and abdominopelvic computerized tomography.  *eos Tumor response definitions used were based on World Health Organization (WHO) criteria.  *eos All adverse effects and laboratory abnormalities for chemotherapy were graded according to the toxicity criteria of the Gynecologic Oncology Group.  *eos Toxicity of chemotherapy was assessed before each course.  *eos 

Study End Point. *eos The primary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to tumor response, failure patterns, disease-free interval, and actuarial survival.  *eos The secondary objectives were to compare the two treatment groups with respect to treatment-related toxicities, treatment delays, and completeness.  *eos Survival was defined as the observed length of life from protocol entry to death or until January 5, 1997 when the data analysis was finished and patients were still alive.  *eos Disease-relapsed interval was defined as the time from entry to local recurrence or distant metastasis.  *eos 

Statistical Considerations. *eos In the study design, it was assumed that 60 eligible patients would be randomly assigned to each treatment group.  *eos At a two-sided P value of 0.05, with the use of a Pearson x2 approximation, the estimated power was 80% an improvement of 25% in survival with the concurrent therapy at the a  0.05 level (two-sided test).  *eos The actuarial disease-free survival and overall survival of patients with complete follow-up were estimated by the life-table method of Kaplan and Meier.  *eos Differences in survival rates were assessed by the log-rank test.  *eos Comparisons of variables between groups were based on the x2 test.  *eos All eligible patients were included in the analysis regardless of whether they completed the assigned treatment. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos The study began in October 1990 and ended in April 1995.  *eos A total of 122 patients with advanced carcinoma of the uterine cervix were entered and all were eligible for follow-up evaluation.  *eos Among them, 60 patients were randomized to the concurrent chemotherapy and radiotherapy, 62 were randomized to the radiotherapy alone.  *eos The median follow-up was 46.8 months (range, 12  69 months).  *eos The mean age of the patients was 56.2 years (range, 33  68 years) in the concurrent group, and 58.7 years (range, 41  69 years) in the radiotherapy group.  *eos Patient characteristics were well balanced between the compared groups.  *eos Detailed data of the presenting patient characteristics with age, FIGO stage, tumor size, histologic grade, and parametrium status were listed in Table 1.  *eos Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 43 patients completed four courses of chemotherapy, 11 patients received three courses, and 6 patients received two courses of chemotherapy.  *eos Among them, interrupted radiotherapy with delayed treatment because of treatment-related toxicity was observed in 9 cases.  *eos A review of the reasons for these unscheduled interruptions of therapy revealed that 8 were due to hematological toxicity, and 1 was due to elevated GOT and GPT.  *eos The duration of the unplanned interruption was 1 week in 5 and 2 weeks in 2, and 2 patients were unable to complete the planned radiotherapy.  *eos Of the radiotherapy group, 60 patients completed radiotherapy with no delays of treatment for toxicity, whereas the planned radiotherapy was interrupted for 1 week in 2 patients because of radiation protitis or neutropenia.  *eos The duration of therapy for the patients was 59 days (range, 49  78 days) versus 51 days (range, 47  65 days) in the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups, respectively.  *eos The incidence of delayed treatment was significantly higher in patients with concurrent chemoradiotherapy than those patients with radiation alone (15.0% versus 3.2%, P  0.02).  *eos However, there was no difference in completeness between concurrent group and radiotherapy group (96.7% versus 100%, P = 0.24).  *eos 

Tumor Response Table 2 shows the tumor response for these two groups.  *eos A tumor response was observed in 88.4% (53/60) of the patients in concurrent group and in 74.2% (46/62) of the patient s in radiotherapy group.  *eos The tumor response was significantly higher in patients receiving concurrent chemoradia tion than in pa tients who rece ived radiatio n alone (P = 0.04).  *eos 

Toxicity. *eos Acute (between initiation of therapy to 6 weeks after therapy) and late treatment-related toxicity (6 weeks after therapy) are listed in Tables 3 and 4.  *eos The acute treatment-related toxicity (grade 3 or 4) appears to be higher with the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group when compared with radiation group (36.7% versus 17.7%, P  0.02).  *eos Although there was no significant difference between the two compared groups with regard to treatment-related late toxicity (concurrent group 23.3% versus radiation group 12.9%, P = 0.13),a nonsignificant trend toward a higher rate of late toxicity in the chemoradiotherapy group is evident.  *eos All these acute toxicities were successfully treated with conservative management, except one death related to neutropenic sepsis after chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Additionally, there was one death related to late toxicity due to a small bowel obstruction with perforation and following with sepsis after chemoradiotherapy.  *eos No treatment-related deaths occurred in the radiotherapy group.  *eos 

Failure Patterns. *eos The failure patterns were evaluated and listed in Table 5.  *eos An analysis of the patterns of failure reveals that the incidence of pelvic failure was equally distributed between the treatment groups (31.7% versus 30.6%, P  0.93).  *eos Additionally, there was also no difference in the incidence of distant failure between the chemoradiotherapy group and the radiotherapy group (21.6% versus 29%, P  0.47).  *eos The median time to pelvic recurrence was 15 months (range, 7  19 months), whereas the median time to distant recurrence was 21 months (range, 12  33 months). *eos 

Survival and Disease-Free. *eos Survival Of the chemoradiotherapy group, 31 patients (51.7%) are alive without evidence of disease, 6 (10%) remain alive with disease, and 21 (35%) died of disease at 7  48 months.  *eos Regarding patients with treatment incompleteness, those two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course because of treatment-related toxicity were dead of disease at 13 and 16 months.  *eos Of the 9 patients requiring treatment delays, 7 patients (77.8%) died of disease (5) or are alive with disease (2), whereas 18 of the 49 patients (36.7%) who had completed their planned treatment without treatment delays died of disease or are alive with disease.  *eos Of the radiation group, 33 patients (53.2%) are alive without evidence of disease, 7 (11.3%) remain alive with disease, and 22 (35.5%) died of disease at 12  45 months.  *eos After a median follow-up of 46.8 months, the disease-free survival and actuarial survival rates at 3 years for patients in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group were not statistically different compared with patients in the radiotherapy group (51.7% versus 53.2%, P  0.92, and 61.7% versus 64.5%, P  0.88, respectively).  *eos Figures 1 and 2 show the 3-year disease-free and overall survival curves for the two groups.  *eos Analysis by Kaplan  Meier method showed that the actuarial survival was not statistically different between the chemoradiotherapy and radiotherapy groups (mean survival time, 38.1 months versus 41.5 months, P  0.27). *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos Treatment results using radiation alone in women with locally advanced cervical cancer are unsatisfactory.  *eos These failures may be attributed to large central tumor volumes, parametrial extensions of disease resistant to local therapies, or metastatic disease outside the radiation field.  *eos Several studies have confirmed that bulky cervical cancer and extensive parametrial invasion are indeed poor prognostic features.  *eos Radiation effects are dependent on well-oxygenated tumor cells.  *eos In theory, bulky tumors have significant hypoxic cell populations that are relatively radioresistant.  *eos The problem of enhanced pelvic control cannot be approached simply by increasing radiation doses because of the additional complications produced by conventional radiation.  *eos Thus, advanced carcinoma, such as those observed in our study, having a large hypoxic cell component, may be ineffective if receiving radiotherapy alone.  *eos Therefore, the design of a more efficient treatment modality, such as the addition of chemotherapy plus radiotherapy, with the objective of increasing tumor control and long-term survival for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, is advocated.  *eos To date, cisplatin is one of the most active drugs tested in this tumor.  *eos Cisplatin has been the mainstay of treatment for cervical cancer, consistently showing a 20  25% response rate.  *eos This drug has also been shown to be a radiosensitizer in vitro and in vivo with documented activity in squamous cell carcinoma.  *eos Moreover, cisplatin combined with vincristine and bleomycin has become more popular, and has been reported to be active in cervical cancer.  *eos Therefore, in an attempt to improve tumor control and survival in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma, the treatment efficacy and tolerability of combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy using cisplatin-based chemotherapy for the treatment of patients with advanced cervical cancer needs to be explored.  *eos Over the past few years, there have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients with advanced cervical carcinoma who received concurrent radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  *eos The concept of concurrent chemoradiotherapy offers a number of theoretical advantages, which produces no delay in the start of definitive radiotherapy, no time gap to induce cross-resistance, and the possibility of eradication of subclinical metastasis.  *eos In addition, the possibility of synergistic action between radiation and chemotherapy may lead to increased tumor cell kill.  *eos The published trials in advanced cervical carcinoma with concurrent chemoradiotherapy, either a single-agent weekly cisplatin or in combination with cisplatin  5-FU or cisplatin  bleomycin  vincristine, yield tumor response rates of approximately 80%, and 3-year survival rates reached 50 to 60% of patients.  *eos However, most of these results were nonrandomized and were based on a small sample size.  *eos Only a randomized trial, using a single agent of weekly cisplatin in combination with radiotherapy, has shown a significant improvement in local  regional control when compared with radiation alone.  *eos A later report of this group confirmed that the addition of cisplatin plus radiotherapy failed to show any significant improvement in long-term survival.  *eos Therefore, to test the hypothesis of concurrent chemoradiotherapy improving the survival rate of advanced cervical cancer, in 1990 we began a phase III randomized trial comparing concurrent chemoradiotherapy versus pelvic radiation alone in patients with advanced cervical carcinoma at our institution.  *eos To further increase the systemic activity and the radiation-enhancing potential of the chemotherapy, we chose cisplatin-based regimens with vincristine and bleomycin in this trial because it had proven high efficacy of local control in our previous phase I and II trials for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos Although the response rate of 88.4%, following concurrent chemoradiotherapy, in our study is very encouraging when compared with 74.3% of the radiotherapy group at the end of therapy, this study does not provide evidence that chemoradiation is better than radiotherapy alone with respect to survival.  *eos Our results indicated that, despite the excellent early tumor response seen during treatment, the benefit of concurrent chemoradiation in terms of reduced mortality and increased pelvic control rates may not be as great as that suggested by other reports.  *eos Our study also revealed that the patterns of recurrences were not changed by the concomitant therapy with chemotherapy and radiotherapy.  *eos The pelvis is still the predominant site of failure in around 30%.  *eos However, a high proportion of patients who failed in this trial had a component of distant failure.  *eos Computerized tomography lacks sensitivity for identifying micrometastasis outside the pelvic radiation therapy field.  *eos This finding has been associated with occult extrapelvic disease.  *eos There appears to be a small decrease in distant relapse among the concurrent chemoradiation group, although the difference was not significant.  *eos The most likely explanation for the poor results in the concurrent chemoradiotherapy group is the higher treatmentrelated toxicity, and that could limit the dose of definitive radiation employed or interrupt the planned radiotherapy.  *eos An equally likely explanation is the negative impact of prolonged treatment time caused by toxicity-induced delays.  *eos Indeed, in our trial, the treatment-related toxicity was severe and resulted in delayed radiotherapy in 15% of patients after chemoradiotherapy, in which 77.8% of patients with treatment delays recurred or died of disease.  *eos Additionally, the two patients who did not complete their planned treatment course died of disease.  *eos The incidence of acute and late complications encountered in our series was higher than anticipated.  *eos In our trial, grade 3 or 4 treatment-related toxicities were observed more often on chemoradiotherapy than radiotherapy alone.  *eos Moreover, two patients died of septicemia following chemoradiotherapy.  *eos Our results demonstrated that multiagent chemoradiotherapy, concurrently administrated with radiation to improve tumor response, can also produce serious acute and late toxicities, and life-threatening complications.  *eos On the other hand, a probable explanation for the poor survival in advanced cervical cancer patients, in spite of a satisfactory rate of initial response, may be the enhancement of accelerated tumor proliferation during treatment.  *eos Some authors have reported that clonogen repopulation in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region accelerates after radiotherapy.  *eos Chemotherapy could also lead to an accelerated regrowth of surviving clonogens.  *eos The accelerated repopulation in the treatment may involve only a small number of surviving cells, which could be omitted by posttreatment investigations.  *eos Thus, tumor masses would be still regressing while the subclinical clonogenic cell repopulation in accelerating.  *eos Therefore, in patients with locally advanced carcinoma of the cervix, improvement in local control will not translate into an improved long-term outcome because this gain will be offset by the eventual development of a relapse.  *eos In conclusion, when comparing patients with concurrent therapy of radiotherapy and chemotherapy to radiotherapy alone, our study showed that concurrent multiagent chemoradiotherapy did not prove to be a superior definitive therapy for patients with advanced cervical carcinoma.  *eos It may be that the multiagent chemotherapy with these drugs, dose, and schedule used in this study is too toxic to use with concomitant radiation therapy.  *eos It is desirable for future studies to see whether other chemotherapeutic regiments such as 5-FU or weekly cisplatin would be more likely to be tolerable and be associated with fewer treatment interruptions.  *eos Such trials are currently underway. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1122</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
The preferred treatment of women with early-stage cervical cancer (FIGO IA2IIA) is radical hysterectomy with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy.  *eos The procedure is well tolerated, with minimal associated morbidity and rare mortality.  *eos The overall prognosis for patients undergoing radical hysterectomy is good, with reported 5-year survival rates ranging from 75 to 90%.  *eos However, among patients with a clinically early cancer, there are prognostic features which identify patients at increased risk for recurrence, recurrent cervical cancer after initial radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy has a poor prognosis, with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5% or less.  *eos 

The clinicopathologic factors which predict a poorer prognosis for patients with an early carcinoma of the cervix have been well established.  *eos A retrospective study of patients undergoing radical hysterectomy at Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) from 1939 to 1977 identified the following risk factors, metastatic tumor to the pelvic lymph nodes, large cervical tumor, parametrial extension of disease, nonsquamous or grade 3 histology, and deep (.75%) cervical stromal invasion.  *eos These factors have been shown to be associated with a high risk of recurrence in other studies, both from single institutions and from cooperative groups.  *eos 

There have been multiple studies published which have retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients at risk for recurrence who received adjuvant therapy compared to those patients not receiving adjuvant therapy.  *eos Whole pelvic postoperative radiation therapy has been found to possibly decrease the incidence of local/regional recurrence with little or no effect on overall survival.  *eos Chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation has been studied in our institution in a prospective Phase II trial, with an apparent improvement in survival rates when compared to historical controls.  *eos Preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been reported as another approach to management of women with early cervical cancer and high-risk features.  *eos Few reports have utilized adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy alone after radical surgery for invasive cervical cancer.  *eos In an effort to determine whether the improved survival in the Memorial Hospital Phase II trial was due to the combination of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy or due to the effect of the chemotherapy alone, a multicenter randomized Phase III clinical trial was designed.  *eos This report summarizes the preliminary results of the trial which closed to patient accrual in June 1994.  *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Patients with clinical Stage IBIIA cancer of the uterine cervix treated by radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph node sampling were eligible for entry into this prospective study if they had one or more of the following risk factors, (1) metastatic disease to pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than or equal to 4 cm in diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 75% or greater stromal invasion, (4) nonsquamous histology, and/or (5) occult parametrial involvement or positive surgical margins.  *eos Patients who met the entry criteria were given the opportunity to participate in this clinical trial, entry and initiation of therapy had to be within 6 weeks of the date of radical hysterectomy.  *eos Patients were assigned a stage based on International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians (FIGO) criteria.  *eos After signing an IRB-approved informed consent form, patients were randomized to receive one of two treatments.  *eos One arm consisted of 2 cycles of chemotherapy (given 34 weeks apart) utilizing bleomycin 20 U/m2/day via continuous 24-hr infusion on Days 13 after an initial intravenous bolus of 20 U/m2 followed by cisplatin 75 mg/m2 by iv infusion on Day 4.  *eos Following recovery from the second cycle of chemotherapy, patients received a course of whole pelvic radiation therapy to a dose of 45 Gy, delivered in 20 fractions via a four-field technique, patients did not receive intravaginal therapy.  *eos Two additional cycles of cisplatin alone (75 mg/m2) were prescribed after completion of the pelvic radiation therapy.  *eos In the second arm of the study, patients were randomized to treatment with a similar regimen of chemotherapy as described above without pelvic radiation, following the first two cycles of cisplatin and bleomycin, the patient then received the third and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week intervals.  *eos 

Four centers participated in this clinical trial.  *eos At each institution, the protocol was approved by the institutional review board prior to entry of patients, all patients signed an informed consent prior to entry.  *eos Central pathology review was not required, although at each institution the specific pathologic criteria for determining depth of invasion were carried out according to written guidelines.  *eos 

Randomization was performed at Memorial SloanKettering Cancer Center by the Department of Biostatistics using an envelope system.  *eos Data forms were maintained in a central location, also at MSKCC.  *eos Additional entry criteria included histologic confirmation of negative para-aortic lymph nodes, normal renal function (creatinine clearance of greater than 60 ml/min), normal liver function tests, hemoglobin of greater than 8.0 g/dl, and a normal DLCO pulmonary function test.  *eos At the completion of treatment, patients were followed according to the individual surgeons preference.  *eos Patients with recurrent disease were classified by the site of recurrence and the interval from the date of radical hysterectomy to the date of recurrence.  *eos 

The initial accrual goal of the trial was 160 patients, with 80 patients randomized to each of the two treatment arms.  *eos The null hypothesis considered that the two treatment arms, chemotherapy alone and chemotherapy plus radiation, would both result in 5-year disease-free survival of 70%.  *eos The alternative hypothesis considered that chemotherapy alone would result in a 5-year disease-free survival of 20% less or 50% (significance level of 0.05 and a power of 0.80).  *eos The estimated duration of the trial when it opened in 1987 was 45 years.  *eos The trial was closed to patient entry in June 1994 due to less than optimal accrual.  *eos 

Overall and disease-free survival curves were computed using the method of KaplanMeier and the differences in survival were compared by the log-rank method.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Between 1987 and 1994, a total of 89 patients were entered into the trial, 45 patients were entered at MSKCC, 24 from the Mayo Clinic, and 10 each from the Uniform Services Health undergone a radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphade-Center and the University of Miami.  *eos The average age of the nectomy, and periaortic lymph node sampling within 6 weeks patients was 45 years and patients ranged in age from 23 to of entry into the trial.  *eos Twenty-five patients had 3 or more high70 years.  *eos Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors, 33 of these patients and the remaining 14 patients had a Stage IIA cancer.  *eos All had 1 risk factor.  *eos Additional histopathologic features of the patients met the entry criteria for surgical procedures and had patients are presented in Table 1.  *eos 

Forty-five patients were randomized to the chemotherapy withdrawn by the institutional principal investigator due to plus radiation therapy treatment arm and 44 patients received poor medical condition of the patient (n ? 1).  *eos Five of 12 chemotherapy alone.  *eos There were 12 major protocol viola-patients received only a portion of the proscribed treatment, tions, including 7 patients who were randomized (6 to che-one patient, randomized to chemotherapy, withdrew after chemotherapy plus radiation therapy and 1 patient to chemother-experiencing an allergic bleomycin reaction during the initial chemotherapy alone) and then either refused treatment (n ?6) or were infusion of bleomycin during cycle 1.  *eos Four patients randomized to chemotherapy plus radiation refused either the radia-to follow-up or had no follow-up data available for analysis.  tion therapy (n ?3) or had a major violation in the radiation Thus, there were 33 patients who received the combination therapy treatment plan when intravaginal radiation therapy of chemotherapy and pelvic radiation and 39 who received was administered, and she did not receive the last 2 cycles chemotherapy alone who could be evaluated for disease-of cisplatin (n ?1). free and overall survival.  *eos 

Overall survival and disease-free. *eos Among the 77 patients evaluable for response, 5 were lost survival curves are presented in Fig. 1.  *eos At a median follow up of 36 months (range 481 months), 19 patients have planned dose when treatment was stopped due to a severe histologic documentation of recurrent cervical cancer.  *eos There skin reaction.  *eos One patient developed radiation proctitis re-has been no significant difference in disease-free survival requiring a colostomy after completion of the prescribed dose between the two treatment groups (Fig. 2), 10 patients in of pelvic radiation therapy. the chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy arm have experienced recurrences compared to 9 recurrences in the  *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos group of patients treated with chemotherapy alone.  *eos Among patients with 3 or more risk factors, there was also no differ-The debate regarding the role of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free survival or overall survival when tients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy compared to patients with 12 risk factors (Fig. 3).  *eos Patterns for an early-stage cervical cancer has generally focused on of recurrence did not appear to be significantly different, as whether radiation therapy alone is beneficial in reducing presented in Table 2. recurrence rates.  *eos Radiation therapy alone probably reduces  *eos 

Toxicity was tolerable in the two treatment arms.  *eos Most the incidence of local and regional recurrences but does acute toxicity was generally of a minor level related to antici-not affect the overall survival.  *eos Monk and colleagues pated toxicity of cisplatin and bleomycin.  *eos Major toxicity suggest that a 65% 5-year survival rate after therapy combinincluded one patient who did not receive the second cycle ing radical hysterectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and of bleomycin due to the onset of pulmonary symptoms and postoperative pelvic radiotherapy for patients with pelvic a significant decrease in pulmonary function compared to a lymph node metastases is an improvement compared to his-pretreatment study.  *eos One patient had the fourth cycle of cis-torical controls.  *eos However, many patients who have these platin held due to persistent grade 3 neutrophil toxicity risk factors are at an increased risk for early, subclinical  (grade 3 ? neutrophil count . 1000 cells/mm3).  *eos Two pa-dissemination of disease which will not be affected by radiatients experienced significant toxicity secondary to the pelvic tion therapy directed to the pelvis.  *eos The rationale for adding radiation therapy, 1 patient received 3780 cGy of 4500 cGy chemotherapy to the pelvic radiation is to provide systemic cytotoxic agents active against cervical cancer with the potential to eradicate micrometastasis.  *eos In the Memorial Hospital pilot trial of the combination of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation, there was a promising improvement in outcome when compared to historical controls who had received pelvic radiation alone.  *eos Killackey et al. reported no recurrences among 22 patients with cervical cancer at high risk after radical hysterectomy utilizing a similar treatment regimen consisting of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy.  *eos Tattersall et al. were unable to demonstrate a difference in disease-free or overall survival in 71 patients randomized to either pelvic radiation versus chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation after radical hysterectomy for Stage IBIIA cervical cancer.  *eos 

The rate or recurrences among all the patients in the trial  validates the selection of the entry criteria as high-risk factors.  *eos The risk factors did not appear to be additive, since the disease-free and overall survival were similar when patients with 12 risk factors were compared to those patients with 3 or more risk factors.  *eos Twelve of the 19 recurrences were either local recurrences only or local plus distant metastases, with no difference in the number of local occurrences between the two treatment arms.  *eos This finding is somewhat surprising since there was no apparent effect of the addition of pelvic radiation to the treatment regimen.  *eos 

The closure of this clinical trial prior to completion of the accrual goal was disappointing.  *eos The initial statistical prediction was that in order to show a 20% improvement in survival of one treatment over the other, 80 patients were needed in each treatment arm.  *eos The analysis of the data from the 89 patients entered is not able to document that the two treatments are equivalent, but must be taken to suggest that the likelihood of finding a significant difference between these two treatment modalities in a full trial of 160 patients is small.  *eos The investigators hope that future cooperative group trials will consider a chemotherapy-only treatment arm in any studies addressing the role of adjuvant therapy after radical hysterectomy for patients at high risk for recurrence.  *eos The advantages of eliminating the radiation therapy component of postoperative therapy are apparent in that the duration of treatment is shorter, costs are reduced, and the long-term side effects of pelvic radiotherapy after radical pelvic surgery are eliminated.  *eos Additionally, if the patient does experience a local or regional recurrence after chemotherapy, pelvic radiation therapy still has curative potential.  *eos Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all patients. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1132</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
ALTHOUGH much progress has been made in the early detection and control of carcinoma of the cervix since the introduction of  the Papanicolau test, it is estimated that about 13,500 new cases of invasive cervical cancer will be diagnosed in 1990 in  the United States with 6,000 patients dying from the disease.  *eos The incidence is even more pronounced in developing countries  where carcinoma of the cervix is the most frequently diagnosed malignancy in females,  with the majority of the patients  presenting with advanced disease.  *eos While surgery and radiotherapy (RT) are equally effective in early-stage disease, radiation  therapy has been the primary treatment modality for stage III disease, with 5-year survival rates between 30% to 45% being  reported.4-8 Attempts to improve these results, including the use of hypoxic cell sensitizers, hyperbaric oxygen therapy,'0  and neutron therapy" have met with limited or no success.  *eos The role of chemotherapy (CT), either as a single agent or in  combination, has been extensively evaluated in advanced or recurrent disease.  *eos Response rates ranging from 0% to 90% have been  reported but are usually of short duration.  *eos Vogl et al and Alberts et al using a combination of bleomycin, vincristine,  mitomycin, and cisplatin (BOMP) in patients with metastatic and/or recurrent disease reported high response rates (> 20% of  the patients with a complete response [CR]) with acceptable toxicity.  *eos Because of the high remission rate, these authors felt  this combination should be used as a front-line treatment for locally advanced cervical cancer.  *eos The use of upfront CT as  initial treatment before pelvic RT would be theoretically advantageous as the vascular supply to the tumor is not  compromised, allowing a higher local tissue concentration of drugs, thereby improving the effectiveness of CT.  *eos To test this  hypothesis, we began in 1984 at the Instituto Nacional de Cancer (Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) a prospective randomized trial  comparing neoadjuvant BOMP CT followed by pelvic RT (CT + RT) versus pelvic RT alone in patients with stage IIIB carcinoma of  the cervix.  *eos Here we report the results of this study. *eos 

MATERIALS AND METHODS. *eos Patient Entry Criteria and Evaluation. *eos Between April 1984 and August 1986, 107 previously untreated patients with stage III B carcinoma of the cervix were entered  on the study.  *eos Eligibility criteria consisted of a histopathologic diagnosis of squamous cell carcinoma, age younger than 70  years with no past history of malignancy, the lower third of the vagina free of disease, and a performance status greater  than 50% in the Karnofsky scale.  *eos Patients also needed to have adequate medullary reserve (WBC  4,000/IpL, platelet count >  100,000/p.L) and normal renal (BUN < 8.9 mmol/L, creatinine < 130 Rimol/L, creatinine clearance > 1.17 mL/s) and liver  (alkaline phosphatase < 110 U/L, bilirubin < 21 pimol/L) function.  *eos Staging evaluation included a complete medical history and  physical examination, cystoscopy, chest x-ray, bipedal lymphangiogram, intravenous (IV) pyelogram, complete blood counts, and  biochemistries.  *eos Computed tomographic scans were not routinely performed.  *eos Clinical assessment of tumor extension was performed  by two investigators, and a pretreatment gynecologic examination under anesthesia was not required.  *eos The International  Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics staging criteria were used in this study.  *eos Patients with lymphangiographic findings of  pelvic or paraaortic nodal disease were not excluded.  *eos No patient underwent lymph node biopsy to confirm the radiologic  findings.  *eos The trial was performed after approval by local institutional ethics committee.  *eos All patients gave written consent  before entry into the trial. *eos 

Fifty-two patients were randomized to the CT + RT arm and 55 to the RT arm.  *eos Of these, 16 were excluded from this analysis.  *eos In  the CT + RT group, 11 refused further therapy, including pelvic RT, after only one cycle of CT, and two others were found to  have abnormal renal function after randomization and before commencement of treatment.  *eos Three in the RT arm refused further  treatment after only a few fractions of irradiation were delivered.  *eos Thus, there were 39 assessable patients in the CT + RT  arm and 52 in the RT arm.  *eos The groups were balanced for age, extension of parametrial disease, lymph node involvement,  hemoglobin level, bulkiness of the cervical disease, and the presence of hydronephrosis.  *eos Patient characteristics are outlined  in Table 1. *eos 

Treatment Regimens. *eos Radiation therapy was delivered using an 18 MeV photon linear accelerator.  *eos The radiation therapy was administered using an  isocentric technique via a pair of parallel opposed anterior and posterior ports.  *eos The superior limit of the radiation field  was the L5-S1 junction, the lower limit wasthe caudal pole of obturator foramen, and the lateral boundaries were 1.5 cm  beyond the lymph nodes as demonstrated on lymphangiography.  *eos A tumor dose of 50 Gy, in 2 Gy daily fractions, 5 days per week,  was prescribed at midplane.  *eos Both fields were treated on each day of treatment.  *eos Paraaortic radiation was not given, even for  the patients with positive paraaortic nodes on lymphangiography.  *eos Following external-beam irradiation, a single low-dose rate  intracavitary application was performed.  *eos A dose of 40 Gy was routinely prescribed to point A, which was located 2 cm superior  to the cervical os (applicator flange) and 2 cm lateral to the central axis of the uterus.  *eos This RT regimen was used for both  groups. *eos 

Chemotherapy consisted of bleomycin 15 U intramuscularly (IM) every 12 hours from days 1 to 4 (total dose, 120 U),  vincristine 1 mg/m2 IV on day 1, mitomycin 10 mg/im 2 IV on day 1, and cisplatin 50 mg/m2 IV on day 1, given on an outpatient  basis every 3 weeks for three cycles.  *eos RT was started 3 to 4 weeks after completion of the third cycle.  *eos Cisplatin was  protected from light and given in 500 mL of normal saline over 1 hour to all patients.  *eos Hydration consistedof 1L of normal  saline infused IV over 3 hours before cisplatin administration.  *eos Postcisplatin hydration consisted of 1.5 L of 5% dextrose in  water in 0.5 normal saline given over 3 hours.  *eos Mannitol 200 mg was administered IV beginning 15 minutes before the cisplatin  infusion.  *eos Potassium chloride at 20 mEq/L and magnesium sulfate were added as needed.  *eos Dexamethasone and metoclopramide were  used as antiemetics.  *eos 

Six months after activation of the study, after nine patients had been treated with CT, the bleomycin dose was reduced to 15  U IM every 12 hours from day 1 to day 3 (total dose, 90 U), and after the first year, cisplatin administration was changed  from day 1 to day 4.  *eos Except for one patient, all others received three cycles of CT and were able to tolerate full protocol  doses of vincristine, mitomycin, and cisplatin.  *eos The third bleomycin cycle was either withheld or the bleomycin dose was  reduced in 15% of the patients, mainly because of severe skin hyperpigmentation. *eos 

Response Criteria. *eos The local response to treatment was evaluated at the time of the intracavitary therapy by a pelvic examination under  anesthesia.  *eos Patients in the combined modality group were also assessed for local response at the completion of CT and before  the start of RT.  *eos However, this assessment was not done under anesthesia.  *eos A CR was defined as the complete resolution of all  measurable disease and symptoms, a partial response (PR) was defined as a 50% or more decrease in the sum of the products of  perpendicular diameters of measurable disease, and stable disease (SD) was defined as less than a 50% decrease in the sum of  the products of perpendicular diameters of the measurable lesions.  *eos Following completion of irradiation, patients were  assessed every 2 to 3 months for the first 2 years and every 6 months thereafter.  *eos Disease status was evaluated by pelvic  examination and by appropriate radiologic and laboratory investigations.  *eos Pelvic failure was defined as disease recurring in  the true pelvis including central and parametrial failure.  *eos Distant disease was defined as disease occuring outside the  pelvis, including paraaortic lymph nodes.  *eos Only supportive palliative treatment was given to relapsing patients, and CT was  not used as a salvage treatment for the patients in the RT-only arm. *eos 

End Points. *eos All patients were observed to determine the efficiency of the combined therapy by comparing overall survival, rate of local  control, incidence of distant metastases, and toxicity between treatment regimens.  *eos During RT, patients were assessed weekly  and were questioned about the presence of treatment-related symptoms.  *eos Toxicity of CT was assessed before each course.  *eos Blood  counts were performed weekly and the lowest granulocyte and platelet counts recorded.  *eos Although not a requirement of the  study, attempts were made to keep the hemoglobin level > 120 g/L during pelvic irradiation.  *eos Late complications were graded as  per the morbidity grading system suggested by Pilepich et al,2 which takes into consideration the impact of the complication  on the patient performance and/or life-style and the required treatment for such complications (Table 2). *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos Patients were randomly allocated to the two treatment arms by drawing cards in sealed envelopes.  *eos Patients were stratified by  age (< 50 years v > 50 years), extensiveness of parametrial involvement (unilateral v bilateral), and lymphangiogram nodal  findings (negative v positive).  *eos We planned to accrue 60 patients into each treatment arm, which would produce a power of 80%  and detect an improvement of 25 % in survival with the combined modality treatment at the a = 0.05 level (two-sided test).   *eos The study was closed earlier because an interim analysis showed that, apart from increased serious toxicity, survival was  significantly worse in the combined approach group, and we did not feel that a positive result could be obtained with a  larger sample.  *eos Survival was calculated by the Kaplan-Meier method21 and was measured from day 1 of therapy until last  follow-up or death.  *eos Actuarial survival curves were compared by the log-rank method.  *eos Comparisons of variables between groups  were based on the X2 test. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos No patient was lost to follow-up.  *eos The median follow-up time for the RT arm is 51 months (range, 34 to 67) and is 44 months  (range, 35 to 65) for the CT + RT. *eos 

Table 3 shows the response rate for the two regimens.  *eos The CR rate was 32.5% and 47% (P = .19) for the RT and CT + RT,  respectively.  *eos Seven patients were not included in response assessment in the combined modality group, four patients who died  of CT complications, two who died of metastatic disease, all of them before commencement of RT, and one other patient whosepelvic disease progressed during CT and who received palliative irradiation only because of poor general condition.  *eos The CR  rate after three cycles of BOMP CT was 25.5%. *eos 

Evaluation of tumor response by pelvic examination following therapy for advanced cervical cancer is a subjective and  imprecise method of assessment.  *eos At the end of therapy, or even after several months posttreatment, it is difficult to be  certain whether some of the pelvic findings are due to residual tumor or postirradiation fibrosis, allowing misinterpretation  of tumor responses.  *eos In Table 4, we show the number of patients still alive in spite of their disease being classified as PR  at the end of treatment.  *eos For the partial responders, 57% in the RT arm and 37.5% in the CT + RT are alive with no evidence of  disease progression at a minimum follow-up time of 3 years.  *eos These numbers are similar to those patients who were felt to have  obtained a CR, only 59% (10 of 17) and 40% (six of 15) are still alive in the RT and CT + RT groups, respectively. *eos 

As of December 1989, 31 of the 52 patients in the RT group and 30 of 39 in the CT + RT had died.  *eos The overall 5-year actuarial  survival for the two groups is shown in Fig 1.  *eos It was 39% and 23% for patients randomized to RT and CT + RT, respectively (P  = .02 by the log-rank test).  *eos Median survivals were 25 months in the RT arm and 10.5 months in the CT + RT.  *eos The 5-year  survival rates for the complete responders were 57% and 36% for the RT and CT + RT groups, respectively.  *eos Table 5 shows the  sites of disease failure.  *eos Pelvic disease remains the major site of failure, with at least 50% of the patients failing within  the irradiated volume.  *eos It was equally distributed between the treatment arms (RT, 54%, CT + RT, 50%).  *eos There was also no  difference in the incidence of distant disease between RT and CT + RT (20% v18.5%). *eos 

Toxicity. *eos Acute toxicity was pronounced in the combined treatment arm (Table 6).  *eos About two thirds of patients experienced moderate to  severe nausea/vomiting.  *eos Skin hyperpigmentation was observed in half of the treated patients, being of severe degree in one  third.  *eos Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were not a problem, with only 7.5% of the patients experiencing a leucocyte nadir of  less than 1,000/ IiL.  *eos Of greater concern was the bleomycin-related pulmonary toxicity.  *eos Five patients (13%) developed such a  complication, and four died as a direct result.  *eos After two bleomycin-related lung deaths (two of nine treated patients), the  bleomycin dose was reduced from 30 U daily for 4 days to 30 U daily for 3 days.  *eos In spite of this, two further patients  experienced a similar complication (two of 18 treated patients).  *eos The cisplatin treatment day was then changed from day 1 to  day 4 but yet another patient developed the same problem (one of 12 treated patients).  *eos At this time, an interim analysis that  was performed disclosed a survival advantage for the RT group, and it was then decided to close the study.  *eos A more detailed  description of the pulmonary toxicity has been the subject of another report.'  *eos Diarrhea was the main complication of pelvic  irradiation, seen in eight patients (15.5%) on RT and 11 (34%) on CT + RT. *eos 

Late complications are shown in Table 7 and consisted of proctitis, cystitis, fistula, and vaginal stenosis.  *eos Grade 2 3  proctitis was seen more frequently on CT + RT.  *eos One patient in the RT group who had grade 3 cystitis, characterized by  frequent hematuria, presented to the emergency room 19 months following completion of pelvic RT with gross hematuria with  clots.  *eos During  atheterization, her bladder was perforated.  *eos This patient developed a fulminant septicemia, and despite  intensive surgical and medical treatments died soon after admission to the hospital.  *eos Postmortem study showed no evidence of  cervical cancer. *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos This study was designed with the objective of answering the question of whether neoadjuvant BOMP chemotherapy is effective in  stage III B carcinoma of the cervix.  *eos Vogl et al'" treated 16 patients with advanced local and/or metastatic cancer of the  uterine cervix.  *eos Except for two patients, all others had received previous treatment (CT in two, pelvic RT in 11, and major  surgery in three).  *eos Of 13 assessable patients, 10 achieved PRs, with three other patients (23%) obtaining a CR.  *eos All responding  patients experienced major symptomatic improvement.  *eos Alberts et a119 studied the use of BOMP chemotherapy in 14 previously  treated patients with advanced (stage IVB) and/or recurrent disease and reported a 29% CR rate.  *eos Treatments were well  tolerated, and some longterm remissions were observed.  *eos Because of the high CR rate and low toxicity, both groups felt that  this combination should be used as a front-line treatment of advanced carcinoma of the cervix. *eos 

The rationale for the use of neoadjuvant CT23 is that (1) the blood supply to the tumor is not compromised by previous  radiotherapy or surgery allowing for better drug distribution into the tumor, (2) patients' tolerance to CT may be enhanced  as performance status and marrow reserve are unaltered by previous treatment, (3) decreasing the bulkiness of the primary  disease would improve the effectiveness of the local RT, (4) there is the possibility of eradication of subclinical  metastases, and (5) theoretically a tumor may be more chemosensitive before surgery or RT.  *eos These reasons together with the  initial promising results with BOMP prompted us to start our randomized study.  *eos 

Although 25.5% of the patients achieved a CR following three cycles of BOMP and 47% of the CT + RT group obtained a CR at the  end of RT, the 5-year overall survival was significantly inferior in the CT + RT group than in the control arm (39% v 21%, P  = .02).  *eos The reason for this surprising and disturbing finding is not entirely clear.  *eos It cannot be accounted for by patient  selection as both groups were well balanced for the wellknown prognostic factors in stage III carcinoma of the cervix.4'24-27  More importantly, all patients in the CT + RT arm completed pelvic RT, as defined by the protocol guidelines, and therefore,  inadequate irradiation dosage cannot explain the poorer results.  *eos Furthermore, even if we exclude the patients who experienced  treatment-related death, the survival in the BOMP group remains significantly inferior (39% v 25%). *eos 

Recently, Withers et al28 have shown that clonogen repopulation in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck region  accelerates after about 4 + 1 weeks after initiation of radiotherapy.  *eos Since repopulation by surviving tumor clonogens is not  a specific response to RT but rather results from killing of tumor cells, these authors have suggested that CT, which is  effective in killing cells, could also lead to an accelerated regrowth of surviving clonogens, lessening the effect of  subsequent RT.  *eos This may explain why in spite of a satisfactory rate of response following neoadjuvant CT, there was no  improvement in local tumor control, and survival was adversely affected.  *eos 

Similarly, in squamous cell carcinoma of the head and neck, upfront CT has produced impressive response rates, but again,  this has not led to an improvement in survival rates over those achieved with RT alone.  *eos Some randomized studies have, in  fact, showed worse survival with the use of neoadjuvant CT.  *eos The most likely explanation for the poorer results in these  neoadjuvant trials is the enhancement of accelerated tumor cell proliferation during treatment.  *eos Withers et a1 have suggested  that the accelerated repopulationlate in the treatment involves only a small number of surviving cells, and rapid  repopulation would not be detectable as a change in volume of the total tumor mass.  *eos Thus, a PR or even a CR could therefore  be of questionable value in determining therapeutic effectiveness, as tumor masses would be still regressing while the  subclinical clonogenic cell repopulation is accelerating.  *eos The mechanisms by which this increased cell proliferation occurs  are not entirely clear, although, as suggested by Tannock,34 it may result from improved nutrition of surviving cells  following shrinkage of the tumor due to previous therapy. *eos 

Another possible explanatory mechanism for our poorer results with the combined treatment modality may be the development of  cross resistance between radiation and certain antineoplastic agents.  *eos The mechanisms responsible for such cross-resistance  remain to be determined, but recent studies have shown significant similarity between the cytotoxicity of irradiation and  alkylating agents and that tumor cells may develop mechanisms of resistance capable of decreasing the cytotoxic effects of  some antineoplastic drugs as well as radiation.  *eos The choice of end point in assessing the therapeuticbenefit of a new  treatment modality in advanced carcinoma of the cervix has to be determined carefully.  *eos It is now clear that response rate is  a poor end point.  *eos It is a subjective evaluation that frequently depends on the ability of the investigator to differentiate  between residual local disease or treatment-induced parametrial fibrosis.  *eos In this study, 27% of the patients (14 of 52) in  the RT group were called partial responders at the end of irradiation.  *eos Of these, 57% remain alive with no evidence of disease  progression.  *eos Similarly, in the combined treatment group, 37.5% of the partial responders are still alive and well.  *eos Recently,  comparisons between computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging have suggested that the latter might become an  important method in evaluating response to treatment.  *eos Transvaginal parametrial needle biopsy has been used to detect  postirradiation recurrent cancer of the cervix and may also play an important role in defining treatment response.  *eos However,  until such procedures prove to be definitive and precise, the use of response to therapy as a predictor of outcome should be  abandoned as an end point in phase III trials. *eos 

The lung toxicity experienced by patients in the CT + RT group is unacceptable.  *eos In this study, the incidence of pulmonary  toxicity was 13% (five of 39), with four patients dying from this complication.  *eos None of the patients who  experienceddrug-induced pulmonary toxicity had any of the well-known risk factors for development of bleomycin lung toxicity.   *eos Recently, Chambers et al also reported a high incidence of pulmonary toxicity in patients receiving BOMP CT for gynecologic  squamous cell carcinoma.  *eos These authors treated 23 patients (20 cervical cancer, two vulvar, one ovarian) and observed the  development of pulmonary toxicity in eight patients (34.5%), with five of them dying a respiratory death while free of  disease.  *eos As in our study, they could not correlate the incidence of lung toxicity with any of the standard risk factors.  *eos Two  other studies reported a 14% incidence of pulmonary toxicity with one fatal drug-related event occurring in each. *eos 

At present, there is no evidence to support the use of upfront CT before pelvic irradiation in stage III B cervical cancer.   *eos In fact, this approach might be detrimental, as demonstrated in the present study.  *eos The high toxicity rate of BOMP CT, in the  dose and schedule used in this study, makes this combination unacceptable for routine use.  *eos Theuse of concomitant CT (usually  fluorouracil and/or cisplatin) and RT has shown promising therapeutic results in a variety of tumors43-45 and may prove  useful in circumventing the problem of accelerated regrowth of surviving clonogens.  *eos The role of concurrent radiosensitizing  CT has yet to be established in advanced carcinoma of the cervix, but this approach deserves further exploitation.  *eos The  effectiveness of this approach will be evaluated in the near future by a prospective and randomized phase III trial sponsored  by the National Cancer Institute of Canada. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1197</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Purpose.  *eos Adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma is controversial because previous trials reported conflicting results.  *eos The present study was designed with restricted selection criteria and high dose-intensities of the two most active chemotherapeutic agents.  *eos 

Patients and Methods. *eos Patients between 18 and 65 years of age with grade 3 to 4 spindle-cell sarcomas (primary diameter >= 5 cm or any size recurrent tumor) in extremities or girdles were eligible.  *eos Stratification was by primary versus recurrent tumors and by tumor diameter greater than or equal to 10 cm versus less than 10 cm. One hundred four patients were randomized, 51 to the control group and 53 to the treatment group (five cycles of 4'-epidoxorubicin 60 mg/m2 days 1 and 2 and ifosfamide 1.8 g/m2 days 1 through 5, with hydration, mesna, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor).  *eos 

Results. *eos After a median follow-up of 59 months, 60 patients had relapsed and 48 died (28 and 20 in the treatment arm and 32 and 28 in the control arm, respectively).  *eos The median disease-free survival (DFS) was 48 months in the treatment group and 16 months in the control group (P = .04), and the median overall survival (OS) was 75 months for treated and 46 months for untreated patients (P = .03).  *eos For OS, the absolute benefit deriving from chemotherapy was 13% at 2 years and increased to 19% at 4 years (P = .04).  *eos 

Conclusion. *eos Intensified adjuvant chemotherapy had a positive impact on the DFS and OS of patients with high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas at a median follow-up of 59 months.  *eos Therefore, our data favor an intensified treatment in similar cases.  *eos Although cure is still difficult to achieve, a significant delay in death is worthwhile, also considering the short duration of treatment and the absence of toxic deaths.    *eos SOFT TISSUE sarcomas represent less than 1% of all malignant tumors and derive from the mesenchymal tissues present in the whole human body.  *eos However, the vast majorities arise from the extra-osseous and subcutaneous soft tissue of the limbs.  *eos Their natural history is partially known and clinical decisions rely on a few simple and well-recognized prognostic factors such as size, grading, and location. *eos 

The treatment of limb sarcomas mainly relies on a combined-modality approach, after the demonstration that pre-or postoperative radiation and conservative surgery led to local control in a high proportion of patients.4 In fact, limb-sparing procedures allow an 85% to 90% local dis-ease-free survival (DFS) rate and demolitive surgery now represents only 5% to 10% of the operations in comparison with the 50% survival rate of the 1960s to 1970s. *eos 

Nevertheless, a great proportion of high-risk soft tissue sarcoma patients develop distant metastases during their lives.  *eos In the early 1960s, this clinical behaviour prompted the introduction of adjuvant chemotherapy trials with the aim of increasing DFS and possibly overall survival (OS).  *eos The first generation of randomized adjuvant trials have recently been reviewed and a meta-analysis performed on the basis of updated patient records.  *eos The main findings were statistical evidence in favor of chemotherapy for local, metastasis, and overall DFS (P = .016, .0003, and .0001, respectively) and a trend towards increased OS (P = .12).  *eos However, in the subgroup of extremity sarcomas, OS was also statistically increased after chemotherapy (P = .029).  *eos 

A second generation of randomized, control-based, adjuvant trials started in the early 1990s.  *eos Their main differences, compared with the previous studies, are the introduction of ifosfamide (IFO) and the intensification of doses in combination with hematopoietic growth factors, and more restricted selection criteria.  *eos Not one new study has been already reported, whereas the present Italian co-operative study closed patient accrual in November 1996 because of the results of the planned interim analysis. *eos 

Here we report the results of the Italian co-operative study after a median follow-up of 59 months and a minimum time between randomization and date last seen of 28 months among patients who did not die.  *eos The time of the analysis (November, 1999) was 36 months after the last randomization.  *eos This time of analysis was chosen because it is generally agreed to be the period in which the great majority of events appear in a patient population with high-risk extremity sarcomas.  *eos 

PATIENTS AND METHODS. *eos Study Design and Staging. *eos After a positive biopsy for sarcoma, all patients underwent complete staging and programmed local treatment.  *eos The patients who satisfied all the selection criteria were then stratified and subsequently randomized to a control or chemotherapy group.  *eos Treatment started after the completion of any local treatment and/or as soon as the wound had healed (Fig 1).  *eos All the patients gave their informed written consent before the randomization.  *eos The staging consisted of a computed tomography (CT) scan and/or magnetic resonance imaging of the primary lesion, and a CT scan of the thorax, other specific tests (angiography, bone scan, CT scan of the brain, and so on) were performed only in the case of clinical suspicion.  *eos 

Selection Criteria. *eos Inclusion criteria were as follows, age, 18 to 65 years, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status less than or equal to 2, primary tumors subfascially localized with diameter greater than or equal to 5 cm, high-grade spindle-cell or polymorphous sarcomas (fibrosarcoma, malignant fibrous histiocytoma, polymorphous liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, malignant schwannoma, angiosarcoma, and polymorphous rhabdomyosarcoma), local relapse of any size, no previous radio/chemotherapy, adequate bone marrow (WBC count of >= 4,000/fiL, platelets = 120.000/mL, and hemoglobin >= 10 g/dL), renal (creatinine <= 1.3 mg/dL), hepatic (SGOT <= 2.5 X normal value and bilirubin <= 1.2 mg/dL), and pulmonary functions.    *eos Exclusion criteria were as follows, distant or regional lymph-node metastases, previous malignancy, medical or psychiatric illness precluding correct written informed consent, pregnancy, uncontrolled infections, and risk of being lost to follow-up.  *eos 

Local Treatment. *eos Patients were treated with radical surgery, wide resection followed by postoperative radiation therapy, or pre-operative radiation therapy.  *eos Radical surgery consisted of amputation in case of massive involvement of critical structures or compartmental resection in highly selected patients.  *eos Wide resection followed by postoperative radiation therapy (64 to 66 Gy in 32 to 33 fractions, 5 fractions per week) was used for patients amenable to conservative surgery with negative margins.  *eos Patients with positive or uncertain margins were evaluated for re-excision of the tumor bed before radiation therapy.  *eos Preoperative radiation therapy (44.8 Gy in 28 fractions in 2.5 weeks, 160 cGy/ fraction, 2 fractions per day) followed by resection with or without a post-or intraoperative boost (16 to 18 Gy for positive or close surgical margins) was used for tumors extending to critical structures for which conservative surgical resection was expected to be inadequate and amputation would usually have to be performed to obtain negative margins.  *eos 

Adjuvant Treatment. *eos Chemotherapy, repeated every 3 weeks, consisted of five cycles of 4'-epidoxorubicin (EPI) 60 mg/m2/die, in a short intravenous (IV) infusion on days 1 and 2 (total dose per cycle, 120 mg/m2), IFO 1.8 g/m2/die diluted in 500 mL of normal saline and administered over 1 hour on days 1 through 5 (total dose per cycle, 9 g/m2), and 6-mercapto-ethansulfonate in a bolus IV injection at 20% of the IFO dose, given before and 4 and 8 hours after the IFO infusions.  *eos Hydration (1,500 to 2,000 mL of fluids IV after chemotherapy), antiemetics (5-hydroxytryptamine-3 antagonists), and filgrastim (300 fig/d SC, days 8 through 15) were routinely administered.  *eos A dose reduction scheme was defined to avoid excessive toxicity.  *eos In the case of incomplete hematologic recovery (defined as WBC < 4,000/mL and platelets [PLTS] < 100.000/mL), treatment was postponed by one or more weeks, furthermore, on complete hematologic recovery, a dose reduction of EPI was applied depending on the observed nadirs (WBC > 1,000/mL and PLTS > 75.000/mL, IFO and EPI doses both 100%, WBC > 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and EPI dose 75%, WBC < 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and EPI dose 50%).  *eos 

Toxicity and Follow-Up. *eos Toxicities were graded according to World Health Organization criteria.  *eos Physical examinations, routine chemistry, and x-ray of the thorax and bones underlying the primary site were performed every 2 months and a CT scan of the thorax was performed every 6 months for the first 2 years.  *eos The same procedures were repeated every 3 months during the third year and every 6 months during the fourth and fifth year of follow-up, with a CT scan of the thorax and/or primary site performed at every other visit.  *eos After the fifth year, patients underwent yearly clinical examinations, with routine chemistry and chest x-rays performed.  *eos Statistical Considerations  *eos 

On the basis of the estimated proportions of patients free from metastatic disease 2 years after diagnosis (60% in the treated group v 40% in the control group), it was estimated that 95 patients were required per arm (beta = 0.80, alpha = 0.05).  *eos An interim analysis was planned when half of the patients had been enrolled.  *eos A difference of P <= .001 (two sided) in DFS between the two groups was considered sufficient to stop patient accrual.  *eos 

All centers faxed protocol-specific eligibility checklists to the statistics office in Aviano, patients were stratified using a four-block stratification by primary tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and recurrent tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and randomized to treatment or control groups.  *eos The checklist with the allocated groups was sent back to the responsible physician.  *eos 

The study period was calculated from randomization to the first occurrence of the considered events (local recurrence alone, metastasis with or without local recurrence, death due to disease, toxic death).  *eos Overall DFS was defined as the time between randomization and the first recurrence, and OS was defined as the time between randomization and death as a result of disease (patients dying in complete remission were considered as censored on the date of death for OS).  *eos 

The intention-to-treat analyses for overall DFS and OS were based on the Kaplan-Meier estimator of the survival function.  *eos Univariate analyses to study the association between these end points and pathologic factors were based on the same estimator, whereas the Coxs proportional hazard model13 was used for multivariate analyses.  *eos The intensities of local recurrences and of distant (with or without simultaneous local) recurrences were estimated by the cumulative incidence function (CIF) approach to the analysis of competing risks.14 The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to test the hypothesis of equality of the distribution of some covariates in the two treatment groups.  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Under the auspices of the Italian National Council for Research (CNR), 104 patients, 53 in the chemotherapy and 51 in the control arm, entered the study between June, 1992 and November, 1996.  *eos In November, 1996, the per protocol interim analysis of disease-free survival revealed a significant difference in favor of chemotherapy (P = .001), therefore the accrual was stopped and the data reported.  *eos The present article deals with a minimum observation time of 36 months calculated from the date of randomization of the last patient (11 of 96).  *eos 

Table 1 lists the demographic characteristics, features of the disease, center of surgery and stratification of the randomized patients.  *eos Overall, there were no statistically significant differences in the considered parameters between the two groups.  *eos 

At first observation, the range of the tumor diameters seems to be different between the two treatment groups.  *eos However, the median diameter is the same in the two groups, and the difference in range is caused by a small number (three patients) of large tumors in the control group.  *eos Overall, the distribution of diameters in the two groups was similar and the Wilcoxon statistical test did not reject the hypothesis that they were equal (P = .19).  *eos 

Local Treatment. *eos Radical surgery was performed in 36 patients (35%), 27 of whom underwent amputation because of massive local extension and/or distal presentation, the other nine had conservative radical surgery.  *eos The remaining 68 patients (65%) were treated using a limb-sparing procedure involving radiation therapy and surgery, 45 underwent surgery and postoperative radiation therapy, and 24 underwent preoperative radiation therapy and conservative surgery (Table 1).  *eos 

Chemotherapy and Toxicity. *eos Seven patients (13%) did not start adjuvant treatment.  *eos Four patients withdrew from the study after having signed the informed consent, and three did not start because they developed lung metastases before starting the first cycle.  *eos The median time between surgery and the start of chemotherapy was 62 days (range, 8 to 187 days), in the three cases with early metastases, the time intervals between surgery and relapse were 42, 74, and 89 days.  *eos 

Of the 46 patients that started chemotherapy, four did not complete the treatment.  *eos One patient refused the fifth and last cycle for personal reasons, and three patients did not complete the treatment because of related toxicities (reappearance of viral uveitis, consecutive episodes of pneumonitis, and persistent leukopenia) after two, three, and four cycles, respectively.  *eos A total of 223 cycles were administered, 62 (28%) at a reduced EPI dose (12% of the total cycles had doses reduced to 75% and 16% were reduced to 50%), contrary to the protocol, IFO was also reduced to 75% and 50% of the planned dose in 3% and 1% of the total cycles, respectively.  *eos Twenty-four percent of the cycles were delayed for toxicity or for nonmedical reasons, in the majority of these cases (16%), the delay was shorter than 1 week and can be attributed to logistic problems rather than to toxicity.  *eos In 8% of these cases, the delay was between 7 and 14 days, thus representing the real recovery time from previous toxicity.  *eos The first cycle was administered at a dose less than or equal to 50% in one patient and less than or equal to 75% in another six patients based on nonprotocol medical decisions.  *eos There was a subsequent slight and constant decrease in the administered doses of mainly EPI, which was in accordance with the predefined reduction scheme and testifies to the aggressiveness of the program.  *eos The mean administered doses of the fifth cycle (94 mg of EPI and 8,156 mg of IFO) were slightly lower than those of the fourth cycle (95.5 mg of EPI and 8,257 mg of IFO).  *eos The average median relative dose-intensity (DI) of the program was 83.3% (Table 2), 63% of the cycles were given at a DI of >= 80% and 48% at a DI of >= 90%.  *eos 

The grade 3 and 4 (G3 and G4, respectively) hematologic toxicity by cycle are listed in Table 3.  *eos The data from the first cycle clearly indicate the aggressiveness of the program, 35% of the patients experienced grade 4 leukopenia, and 4% experienced grade 4 thrombocytopenia.  *eos From the third cycle, grade 4 leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were less frequent because of the applied dose reductions, and anemia became the most important hematologic side effect, requiring repeated packed red cell transfusions in 24% of the patients.  *eos Neutropenic fever was also mostly observed after cycles 1, 2, and 3 (15 of 16 episodes), with 9%, 13%, and 11%, respectively, of the patients being admitted to hospital for IV antibiotics.  *eos However, the duration of leukopenia never exceeded 4 days, and all of the patients were rapidly discharged.  *eos Prophylactic oral antibiotics were given in an additional eight cases.  *eos 

The nonhematologic toxicities were reversible alopecia (100% of cases), grade 3 mucositis (10% of cases), and grade 3 nausea and vomiting (3% of cases).  *eos No other grade 3 toxicities were encountered and, in particular, no cardiac impairment was observed as evaluated by a decrease in the left ventricular ejection fraction.  *eos 

Follow-Up Data. *eos At the time of statistical analysis (November 1999), the median follow-up for the 104 patients included in the study was 59 months, 61 months in the treatment arm and 55 months in the control arm.  *eos The ranges for the observation time (ie, the time between randomization and date of last visit) among censored patients who did not die were 28 to 84 months, 39 to 84 months, and 28 to 81 months, respectively.  *eos During the follow-up period, disease recurrences were recorded in 28 of the 53 treated patients and in 32 of the 51 patients who did not undergo adjuvant therapy, 20 treated patients and 28 untreated patients died.  *eos All deaths except one (in the control arm) were disease related.  *eos 

Intention-To-Treat Analysis for Survival. *eos Univariate analyses did not reveal any statistically significant difference in overall DFS and OS for any of the characteristics considered (age, sex, center of surgery, histology, grading, site of primary tumor, presentation, diameter, local treatment, and stratification) with the exception of adjuvant treatment (data not shown).  *eos 

Because none of the patient characteristics was associated with the end point at the time of univariate analysis, unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were computed by means of the Cox proportional hazards model.  *eos 

Overall DFS. *eos Sixty first events (local, distant only, and synchronous distant and local) were observed overall (32 in the control arm and 28 in the treatment arm).  *eos Table 4 lists these events.  *eos In four patients, the first event was a synchronous local relapse with metastases (one patient in the control arm and three patients in the treatment arm).  *eos Furthermore, nine patients developed metachronous relapse at a different site (three were local relapse after a metastasis and six were distant relapses after a previous local relapse).  *eos Additional relapses at the same site after an adequate treatment are not reported.  *eos The median overall DFS was 48 months among treated patients and 16 months in the control group.  *eos Patients in the treated arm experienced a 41% reduction in the risk of disease relapse (HR, 0.59, 95% CI, 0.36 to 0.99, P = .04) (Fig 2).  *eos The absolute improvement deriving from chemotherapy was 27% at 2 years (72% and 45% in the treatment and control arms, respectively, P = .003), and 13% at 4 years (50% and 37%, respectively, P = .19) (Table 5).  *eos 

Local DFS. *eos Overall, 13 patients had a local recurrence of disease as the first relapse without simultaneous distant metastases (four patients in the treatment arm and nine patients in the control arm, Table 4).  *eos The cumulative incidence function estimates at 2 years were 0% and 10% for the treatment and the control arms, respectively (P = .02), and at 4 years, they were 6% and 17%, respectively (P = .09) (Table 5).  *eos 

Overall, patients in the treatment arm had an indication of reduction in the risk of local recurrence (P = .07).  *eos (Fig 3).  *eos Four patients had local relapses simultaneously with metastasis (one patient in the control arm and three in the treatment arm), and another three patients developed a local relapse as the second relapse after a distant metastasis (two patients in the treatment arm and one patient in the control arm).  *eos Taking into account the overall local relapse rate (all local events observed), 11 patients in the control group and nine in the treatment group experienced local failure.  *eos The distribution between the different local treatment modalities (radical surgery, surgery and postoperative radiation therapy, and preoperative radiation therapy and surgery) was respectively, two of 16 patients, seven of 20, and two of 15 for the control group and three of 20 patients, six of 24, and zero of nine for the treatment group.  *eos 

Metastasis-Free Survival. *eos As the first event, a total of 47 distant relapses were observed (22 single distant events in the control group and 21 in the treatment group, one synchronous distant and local event in the control group and three in the treatment group Table 4).  *eos The estimated cumulative incidence function at 2 years was 28% for the control arm and 45% for the treatment arm (P = .08), at 4 years it was 44% and 45%, respectively (P = .94).  *eos (Table 5).  *eos Overall, the difference in distant relapses as the first event between the two arms was not significant (P = .48, Fig 3).  *eos Six additional patients (four in the control arm and two in the treatment arm) had a distant metastasis as a second relapse after a local relapse.  *eos 

OS. *eos There were a total of 48 deaths, 20 in the treated group and 28 in the control group, forty-seven deaths were disease related.  *eos Patients died from uncontrolled metastatic disease.  *eos One patient in the control group died without evidence of disease at 28 months and was considered as censored for overall survival.  *eos The median survival time was higher among patients who underwent adjuvant therapy (75 months), compared with untreated patients (46 months) (Fig 4).  *eos The reduction in risk in favor of treated patients was statistically significant (HR, 0.52, 95% CI, 0.29 to 0.93, P = .03).  *eos The absolute improvement deriving from chemotherapy was 13% at 2 years (85% and 72% in the treatment and control arms, respectively, P = .10), and the improvement increased to 19% at 4 years (69% and 50%, P = .04) (Table 5).  *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos Adjuvant treatment of localized soft tissue sarcomas is controversial because no sufficient and convincing data are available.  *eos The preliminary data of previous studies were sometimes positive for DFS and OS,15-19 but further analyses, made after an adequate follow-up time, indicated a disappearance of the positive effect of chemotherapy on 20,21 and, in some cases, worse results.22 However, the recently published meta-analysis,7 involving 1,568 patients, showed a statistically significant benefit for treated patients of 6%, 10%, and 10% for local, metastatic, and overall DFS, respectively, and a favorable (but not statistically significant) trend in OS (4%), after a median of 9.4 years of follow-up.  *eos Furthermore, in the subgroup of 886 patients  affected by extremity sarcomas, the difference in OS between treated and untreated patients was significant (P = .029), and the absolute benefit after 10 years increased to 7%.  *eos 

Furthermore, a number of other points about the first-generation studies evaluated by the meta-analysis should be discussed.  *eos First, the selection criteria were different between studies, resecting the different times at which the studies were activated (1973 to 1990).  *eos In fact, disease stages, tumor sizes, and grading varied greatly.23 Second, eight studies made use of a polychemotherapy including an anthracycline, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and dacarbazine, but only the first is active in soft tissue sarcomas, the others probably increased toxicity.  *eos Third, six studies used doxorubicin as a single agent at doses ranging from 60 to 90 mg/m2 per cycle (total doses of 420 to 540 mg/m2), whereas the per cycle and total doxorubicin doses in the polychemotherapy studies were 50 to 90 mg/m2 and 200 to 550 mg/m2, respectively, indicating possible underdosing of the principal active agent.  *eos 

Although these first-generation trials are no longer the gold standards, the meta-analysis did reveal a number of elements that suggested a positive role of adjuvant chemotherapy.  *eos Furthermore, these studies did not use IFO, which is now recognized as an active agent in this disease.24-26 In addition to the inclusion of IFO, the recent introduction of hematopoietic growth factors has allowed an increase in the doses and dose-intensity without negatively affecting patient safety.  *eos These developments created new interest in the use of dose-intensification for advanced disease27-31 and the planning of new trials of adjuvant treatment.  *eos 

The early 1990s saw the activation of a number of second-generation protocols throughout the world, which, although they were planned independently, were extraordinarily similar in terms of their selection criteria, chemotherapeutic regimens, and use of growth factors.  *eos 

The regimen used in the present study represents the highest dose-intensity ever tried in an adjuvant setting for soft tissue sarcomas.  *eos It is directly derived from consecutive phase I-II dose-intensification trials carried out at the Centro di Riferimento Oncologico of Aviano.27,31 The epirubicin dose level of 60 mg/m2 X 2 days represents the step before the maximum-tolerated dose established in those trials (70 mg/m2 epirubicin X 2 days) when given in combination with fixed full doses of ifosfamide (1.8 g/m2/d X 5 days) in advanced cases of soft tissue sarcoma.  *eos This maximum-tolerated dose gave 13 responses of 13 assessable patients, but induced relevant toxicities.31 Therefore, in the present study, the age of the patients was limited to 65 years, the number of cycles was limited to five, and a predefined dose reduction scheme was established to reduce the dose of anthracycline depending on the level of leukopenia reached during the previous cycle.  *eos 

The toxicity of the program was not negligible.  *eos In fact, despite the routine use of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, grade 4 leukopenia was observed in 28% of the administered cycles, neutropenic fever in 13% of the patients (16 episodes out of 223 cycles, 7.2%), and anemia requiring multiple transfusions occurred in 24% of the patients.  *eos However, no deaths due to toxicity were registered and all patients recovered from anaemia within 2 to 3 months of the completion of chemotherapy.  *eos The serial hematologic evaluations made during the median follow-up of 3 years confirmed the complete recovery of hematopoietic functions.  *eos No other acute or chronic toxicities were reported.  *eos 

The main finding of the intention-to-treat analysis in this study is the beneficial impact of chemotherapy on the DFS (P = .04) and OS (P = .03) for patients affected by high-risk extremity soft tissue sarcomas and treated with chemotherapy.  *eos The benefit is seen despite the fact that four of the seven patients that never started chemotherapy for different reasons died from uncontrolled metastatic disease.  *eos The absolute benefit deriving from treatment was a 19% reduction in death at 4 years (P = .04) (Table 5).  *eos Furthermore, the univariate analysis performed at interim analysis and repeated yearly thereafter for all characteristics reported in Table 1 did not reveal any statistically significant differences between the two patient groups, except for chemotherapy.  *eos However, only high-risk patients were selected for this study.  *eos Therefore, other more favorable groups of patients have not been considered for this treatment.  *eos 

The protocol methodology included an interim analysis after half of the predefined patient population was randomized.  *eos A difference of P = .001 (two sided) in DFS between the two groups was considered sufficient to stop patient accrual.  *eos This P value was reached, and the protocol was closed.  *eos We chose DFS as the end point because OS is not a realistic end point for an interim analysis in a rare disease and in the adjuvant setting.  *eos Furthermore, the Rizzoli Institute had already published a positive adjuvant trial17,18 and the risk of undertreating a great number of patients was a concern.  *eos 

The incidence of local relapse and the dismal outcome of the untreated patients are other points to be discussed.  *eos These unfavorable aspects of our study are probably related to the selection of high-risk patients only.  *eos The outcome results at 4 years revealed a 23% overall local relapse, with a trend in favor of the treatment group.  *eos This unfavorable local behaviour is mainly because of the dimension of local disease, in our opinion.  *eos In fact, the median diameter of the primary tumors and relapses was 10 and 9 cm, respectively, with no differences between treatment and control groups (Table 1).  *eos However, between the three different local approaches there was a trend in favor of preoperative radiation therapy (two local relapse of 24 patients in the control arm, 8.3%).  *eos Moreover, this treatment option5,32,33 was chosen for those patients presenting with locally far-advanced disease or with disease approaching critical structures (nerves and vessels), therefore a high incidence of local relapse could be foreseen.  *eos 

Questions regarding the adequacy of the surgical approach and consequently the adequacy of margins could be raised, but only 10 patients were treated outside of referral centers and only two of those patients had local relapses.  *eos Additionally, the difference between the treated and untreated groups is further evidence of the positive impact of chemotherapy on local control, as already reported by the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer adjuvant trial. *eos 

The outcome of the untreated patient group was worse than that of previous trials.  *eos This is not surprising because our patients were selected based on the worst prognostic factors.  *eos Only two previous studies, the Rizzoli17,18 and the Foundation Bergonie trials,19 used similar patient selection criteria.  *eos In these studies, the behaviour of control groups was comparable to that observed in the present trial.  *eos However, because our study was designed in 1991 and activated in June 1992 and included only 104 patients, it is possible that an imbalance of other prognostic factors not included in Table 1 could have led to the difference in outcome between the two groups.  *eos 

Time is a crucial issue in oncology and in the development of metastatic disease from high-risk soft tissue sarcomas.  *eos Therefore, the observation time of a given study population could be misleading, as reported for some of the first-generation trials.20,21  *eos 

The present trial deals with data obtained at a median follow-up time of 59 months and 36 months after last randomization.  *eos We think that these data are mature enough to be reported on, and we look forward to being able to describe definitive results in a future report based on 10 years of median follow-up.  *eos 

Adjuvant treatment of soft tissue sarcomas is still strongly debated35,36, despite 14 published trials and one meta-analysis performed on 1,568 randomized patients.  *eos Although a few second-generation trials are still going on, this study is the first to be concluded (November 1996), having stopped the patient accrual according to a predefined statistical methodology.  *eos 

A beneficial impact of chemotherapy on DFS and OS was observed at a median follow-up time of 59 months.  *eos However, a cure seems difficult to achieve in high-risk patients, in our study population, 60% of the patients have relapsed and continue to die in both arms.  *eos Nevertheless, a significant delay in relapse and death, as observed in our treatment group, is worthwhile and cost-effective in young patients, also taking into account the shortness of the treatment and the absence of toxic death.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>3563</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Intestinal anastomosis has been successfully performed for more than 150 years using a variety of techniques, materials, and devices.  *eos Of these, the method that has proven successful in most situations and in the hands of most surgeons has been the two-layer anastomosis using interrupted silk sutures for an outer inverted seromuscular layer and a running absorbable suture for a transmural inner layer.  *eos The only appreciable shortcoming of the two-layer technique is that it is somewhat tedious and time-consuming to perform.  *eos Recently, several reports have appeared advocating a single-layer continuous anastomosis using monofilament plastic suture.  *eos This anastomosis requires less time to fashion, costs less than any other method, and may have a lower risk of leakage.  *eos Because of these potential advantages, we hypothesized that the single-layer technique could be introduced into our surgical teaching program with no increase in anastomotic failure and that it could be performed in less time than the two-layer technique.  *eos 

METHODS. *eos 

All adult patients requiring intestinal anastomosis at Denver Health Medical Center from September 1996 to September 1999 were considered eligible.  *eos Patients requiring anastomosis to the rectum or third or fourth portion of the duodenum were excluded because the single-layer continuous method is awkward when both ends of the bowel cannot be fully mobilized.  *eos Patients requiring gastrointestinal anastomosis were excluded because of the presumably increased risk of hemorrhage from the stomach.  *eos Patients were also excluded if the surgeon did not believe that either technique could be used because of technical concerns such as edema or scarring.  *eos 

Patients were assigned to either the one-or two-layer technique in a prospective, randomized fashion.  *eos Randomization was performed using random permuted blocks of size 10.  *eos Opaque, sealed envelopes indicating the technique to be used were placed in the operating room and were drawn sequentially when the need for intestinal anastomosis became apparent.  *eos The study was approved by the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board, which also granted a waiver of consent because both methods were in common use in our institution and had similar results.  *eos 

All two-layer anastomoses were constructed using interrupted 3.0 silk Lembert sutures for the outer layer and a running 3.0 polyglycolic acid suture for the transmural inner layer.  *eos All single-layer anastomoses were constructed using a continuous 3.0 polypropylene double-needle suture that began at the mesenteric border (Fig. 1).  *eos All layers of the bowel wall except the mucosa were incorporated.  *eos Each bite included 4 to 6 mm of the seromuscular wall, the larger bites were used at the mesenteric border to ensure an adequate seal.  *eos Each stitch was advanced approximately 5 mm. To avoid ischemia of the anastomosis, the surgeon had to ensure that only enough pressure was applied to the suture while following to approximate the ends of the bowel and render the anastomosis watertight.  *eos The time recorded for construction of the anastomosis began with the placement of the first stitch and ended with cutting the excess material from the last stitch.  *eos 

Anastomotic failure was defined as a fistula documented radiographically or by the finding of a nonabsorbable material (charcoal) draining from the wound after oral administration, or a visible disruption of the suture line during reexploration.  *eos The complication of abscess without fistula was also included in the analysis because it is potentially related to the anastomosis.  *eos 

Calculations for the outcome variables of leak, abscess, and time for construction of the anastomosis used the number of anastomoses in each group for the denominator.  *eos Calculations of the length of stay used the number of patients for the denominator.  *eos Calculations of the cost of materials were based on the actual hospital costs for the suture material and the standardized utilization of suture material by the surgeons.  *eos For two-layer anastomoses, three packets of 3.0 silk sutures, each containing five needled sutures, and two packets of 3.0 polyglycolic acid sutures were used.  *eos Each packet of silk sutures cost $9.41, and each packet of polyglycolic acid suture cost $1.88.  *eos For single-layer anastomoses, one package of double-needled 3.0 polypropylene suture was used.  *eos Each packet of polypropylene suture cost $4.61.  *eos All procedures were performed by postgraduate year 3 to 5 residents from the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center assisted by an attending surgeon, or by the attending surgeons themselves.  *eos 

Data were analyzed based on the intention-to-treat principle.  *eos Continuous data were analyzed using the Student t test.  *eos The Fisher exact test and the Pearson chi-square test were used to analyze categorical data.  *eos P < .05 was considered to indicate statistical significance.  *eos All data analysis was performed on an IBM-compatible PC using SPSS 10.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago).  *eos 

RESULTS. *eos 

One hundred twenty-five patients were enrolled in the study.  *eos Fifty-nine patients were randomized to single-layer anastomoses and 66 to two-layer anastomoses.  *eos For six patients who required more than one anastomosis, the same method was used for each anastomosis.  *eos This resulted in 65 single-layer continuous and 67 two-layer interrupted anastomoses.  *eos The groups were evenly matched by age, sex, diagnosis, and location of the anastomosis (Table 1).  *eos Anastomotic leaks, intraabdominal abscesses, length of time required for anastomosis, length of stay, and material costs are shown for both groups in Table 2.  *eos Four patients in the study died, but no deaths were related to the anastomosis.  *eos Of the three patients in whom fistulas developed, one patient had abdominal carcinomatosis, one had diffuse peritonitis from an iatrogenic injury of the cecum that occurred during a radical resection of a gynecologic malignancy, and the third patient had been treated with an abbreviated laparotomy for trauma and was undergoing a planned reoperation.  *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos 

The two-layer interrupted anastomosis has its origins in the early 19th century through the experimental work of Travers and of Lembert, who advocated careful approximation of the serosal surfaces of the bowel and devised a method of suturing to accomplish this.  *eos In 1836, Dieffenbach performed the fist successful anastomosis of the small intestine using Lemberts method.  *eos In 1880, Czerny advocated the addition of an inner layer to reduce the risk of leakage and to achieve a precise mucosal approximation.  *eos Since then, the technique has remained essentially unchanged except for the evolution of suture material for the inner layer. *eos 

The single-layer interrupted anastomosis was never entirely abandoned and has periodically attracted renewed interest.  *eos The single-layer continuous anastomosis is a contemporary innovation first described by Hautefeuille in 1976.  *eos In the United States, the first mention of this technique was by Allen et al,18 who presented their results with its use before the Texas Surgical Society in 1979.  *eos It was then popularized by a colon and rectal surgical group based in Houston, Texas. *eos 

The present study demonstrates that a single-layer continuous anastomosis is similar in terms of safety to the two-layer technique, but that it can be constructed in a significantly shorter time and at a lower cost.  *eos These results also imply that the technique can be safely introduced into a surgical training program without a painful learning curve.  *eos 

The ultimate test of the suitability of a technique for intestinal anastomosis is its ability to heal without leakage.  *eos This complication has catastrophic consequences for the patients health as well as the cost of care.  *eos Ischemia, tension on the anastomosis, and poor technique are clearly responsible for anastomotic failure and are all under the direct control of the surgeon.  *eos It is not surprising, therefore, that both Feilding et al and Tuson and Everett found that leakage rates varied significantly between surgeons and tended to be lower with more experienced surgeons.  *eos Other traditional risk factors such as diabetes, steroids, anastomotic method, blood loss, and nutritional factors have not clearly been predictive of anastomotic failure.  *eos Numerous studies in the literature comparing techniques (e.g., one-layer vs. two-layer, hand-sewn vs. stapled, and end-to-end vs. end-to-side) have failed to demonstrate a clear superiority of one over another.  *eos In fact, the only technique that has been unequivocally demonstrated to be unacceptable is the everted anastomosis.  *eos Given that, for a new technique to be acceptable, it only needs to be demonstrated safe by a number of different surgeons in a large number of patients.  *eos Table 3 shows a collected series of single-layer continuous anastomoses, and a leakage rate of 1.7% in 3,027 patients fulfills this criterion.  *eos 

The mean time saved by creating the single-layer anastomosis, 10 minutes, may seem relatively insignificant.  *eos However, our study design did not include the time required to prepare the bowel for anastomosis, which is considerably less for the one-layer technique.  *eos To accomplish a two-layer anastomosis, at least 1 cm of the serosal surface must be circumferentially cleared of mesentery, appendices epiploica, and omentum before beginning the anastomosis.  *eos With the single-layer method, less circumferential clearing is required, and in many instances no clearance is necessary.  *eos 

Further, most of the anastomoses in this study were performed by residents, who were often unfamiliar with the technique or were performing their first intestinal anastomosis.  *eos The senior authors of this paper (J.M.B., E.E.M.) have used the single-layer technique exclusively for many years and can routinely perform an anastomosis in 8 to 10 minutes.  *eos This time has been documented by other surgeons using the single-layer continuous method.  *eos In contrast, it is difficult for an experienced surgeon to create a two-layer anastomosis in less than 20 to 25 minutes.  *eos Therefore, the overall time savings may be closer to 20 to 25 minutes, including bowel preparation, in experienced hands.  *eos 

It was surprising to see the considerable difference in cost of materials for the anastomoses.  *eos Most of the difference is accounted for by the cost of the silk suture packets, at $9.41 each.  *eos Because at least three packets are required (15 sutures), the cost for the outer layer alone is $28.33 compared with $4.51 for one packet of polypropylene suture.  *eos Even more dramatic is the difference in cost when compared with a stapled anastomosis, the disposable staple gun costs $115.26 and two refills cost an additional $123.54, for a total of $238.80!  *eos In todays cost-conscious environment, the use of staples for anastomoses seems irresponsible if a hand-sewn anastomosis can also be safely used in a similar time interval.  *eos 

Another surprising finding was the 2-day difference in the mean length of stay.  *eos Although it did not quite reach statistical significance, it may be related to an intrinsic difference between the two methods, the single-layer anastomosis always has a larger lumen.  *eos It is possible that gastrointestinal function may return to normal in a shorter time with the single-layer method, although further studies would be required to confirm this speculation.  *eos 

The apparent success of the single-layer continuous anastomosis may be attributed to several factors.  *eos Because less mesentery is cleared for the single-layer anastomosis, the cut edge of the bowel is more likely to have an adequate blood supply.  *eos Another factor is related to the properties of a continuous monofilament plastic suture line.  *eos Although it is certainly possible to create an ischemic continuous anastomosis by applying too much tension while following the suture, Hautefeuille has argued that this is easier to avoid with a continuous suture because there is no point in the anastomosis where the bowel is completely devoid of its blood supply.  *eos In contrast, this can easily occur to the tissue enclosed by an interrupted suture.  *eos Further, the surface of monofilament plastic suture is slick and may permit areas of relative excess extension to equilibrate with surrounding areas of less tension by minute movements of tissue with respect to the suture material.  *eos Bailey et al have speculated that the continuous single-layer suture, which resembles a circular coiled spring, may be able to expand and contract depending on intraluminal forces.  *eos This, they argue, may also explain the rarity of stenoses of the suture line.  *eos 

The major weakness of the study is its relatively small sample size.  *eos It is therefore difficult to make definitive statements regarding the relative risk of uncommon outcomes, such as anastomotic leakage.  *eos To detect a significant difference in leakage rates based on our data, a power analysis indicated that 1,500 patients would be required.  *eos We did not believe we could realistically enroll this many patients, instead, a multiinstitutional trial would be necessary.  *eos However, our results and those in the literature are consistent and reassuring.  *eos We conclude that the single-layer continuous anastomosis requires less time to construct and has a similar risk of leakage compared with the two-layer technique.  *eos It also costs less than any other method and can be safely introduced into a surgical training program with no apparent increase in complications.  *eos For these reasons, we believe the single-layer continuous anastomosis is superior to the two-layer interrupted technique.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>4016</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Colorectal cancer is one of the most common adult  malignant tumours, affecting one person in twenty in the  USA and in most developed countries.  *eos Although  40-50% patients may be cured with surgery, many will  develop metastatic disease.  *eos For these patients, treatment  with fluorouracil, usually modulated by folinic acid, is  the only option and the median survival is  10-12 months.  *eos When the tumour progresses after first-line treatment with fluorouracil, there is no standard  treatment.  *eos Survival is short and associated with weight  loss, onset or worsening of tumour-related symptoms, and poor quality of life.  *eos Because cytotoxic agents have low response rates and can be associated with severe side-effects, many patients receive supportive care.  *eos In first-line chemotherapy, fluorouracil with folinic-acid is  better than supportive care (or delayed chemotherapy) for survival and quality of life, but the value of second-line chemotherapy in metastatic colorectal cancer has  not yet been proven.  *eos 

Irinotecan is a topoisomerase I inhibitor that blocks the DNA replication step of the enzyme,leading to multiple single-strand DNA breaks, which eventually blocks cell division.  *eos In phase II studies, irinotecan has  objective antitumour activity in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer, even in those with documented  fluorouracil-resistant tumours, with response rates of  11.23%.  *eos An additional 40% of patients experienced tumour stabilisation for a median of 5 months.   *eos Common side-effects included delayed diarrhoea, neutropenia,early cholinergic syndrome, nausea and  vomiting, alopecia,and asthenia.  *eos The dose-limiting toxic  effects were severe diarrhoea and neutropenia. *eos 

The trial we report was started in 1995 to compare irinotecan with supportive care alone for survival, quality  of life, and other clinical variables.  *eos The participants were  patients with metastatic colorectal cancer in whom fluorouracil chemotherapy had failed.  *eos 

Methods.  *eos 

Endpoints. *eos 

Overall survival was the primary endpoint.  *eos The secondary objectives were the impact of treatment on performance status, bodyweight,tumour-related symptoms, and quality of life.  *eos 

Patients' selection. *eos 

To be eligible for randomisation, patients had to meet the following criteria, histologically proven metastatic colorectal cancer, progressive metastatic disease documented on the basis of either a 25% increase in the size of target lesions or an increase in carcinoembryonic antigen by 1.25 times an initial reference value and a baseline value of more than 10 ug/L,  which allowed inclusion of patients with non-measurable  disease (peritoneal carcinomatosis and pelvic recurrences),  progression documented by two measurements not separated by  more than 6 months and tumour progression while on  fluorouracil or within 6 months of the last fluorouracil infusion, having had one adjuvant and/or no more than two palliative  fluorouracil-based regimens, age 18-75 years, WHO performance status 0.2, neutrophils 2 10/L or more, platelets  100x10/L or more, total bilirubin 1.25 the institutional upper normal limit (IUNL), or less, liver transaminases 3xIUNL (in  case of liver metastases, bilirubin <=1.5 IUNL and  transaminases <=5 IUNL), or more, serum creatinine  135 umol/L or less, wash-out of 4 weeks for radiotherapy or  chemotherapy, and written informed consent.  *eos 

Patients with the following criteria were not eligible, previous treatment with topoisomerase I inhibitors, bulky disease (involving more than 50% of the liver volume or 25% of the lung volume, or abdominal mass >=10 cm), metastases in the  central nervous system, or unresolved bowel obstruction or diarrhoea.  *eos 

Randomisation and study treatments. *eos 

Registration forms were sent to Rhone-Poulenc Rorer Research and Development (Antony, France) where eligibility criteria  were electronically checked.  *eos If all criteria were fulfilled, the  randomisation was done electronically in the ratio of irinotecan to supportive care 2,1, with stratification by centre.  *eos 

In the irinotecan group, patients were given best supportive care and irinotecan 350 mg/m, diluted in 250 mL normal saline or dextrose, over a 90 min intravenous infusion every 3 weeks  (or 300 mg/m if aged >=70 years or WHO performance status 2, according to previously recognised risk factors for developing  toxicity).  *eos Guidelines were provided for the management of side-effects (panel).  *eos Treatment was to be started no longer than  8 days after randomisation.  *eos In the supportive-care alone group, patients were given best supportive care and were seen every 3 weeks.  *eos Supportive care was defined as the best care available as judged by the attending physician, according to institutional standards for each centre.  *eos Supportive care included antibiotics,  analgesics, transfusions, corticosteroids, or any other  symptomatic therapy (except iriontecan or other topoisomerase  I inhibitor), and/or assistance of a psychotherapist.  *eos Localised  radiation therapy to alleviate symptoms such as pain was  allowed provided that the total dose delivered was in the  palliative range according to institutional standards.  *eos 

Analysis of best supportive care. *eos 

Supportive care and concomitant medications were reported at each visit (every 3 weeks in both groups).  *eos They were classified  with the WHO dictionary, further subclassification was done  with the WHO code for anatomical therapeutic class (ATC).   *eos With these classifications, analgesics were divided into opioids  or non-opioids and analysed in 3-week blocks.  *eos 

Follow-up. *eos 

Patients visited the investigator for assessment and treatment every 3 weeks.  *eos All adverse events were reported according to  the National Cancer Institute's common toxicity criteria.   *eos After discontinuation of treatment in the irinotecan group, patients were regularly assessed as in the supportive care group  (tumour status, symptoms, or side-effects, every 3 weeks) until  death or for at least a year.  *eos Beyond 1 year, only date of death  was traced.  *eos 

Quality of life. *eos 

Quality of life was assessed with the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) QLQ-C30 questionnaire (including five function scales, one global health-status scale, and nine symptom scales), which was filled in at  baseline, at 3 weeks, 6 weeks, and then every 6 weeks.  *eos After  discontinuation of treatment in the irinotecan group, patients continued to fill in QLQ-C30 questionnaires every 6 weeks as in  the supportive-care group.  *eos 

Statistical analysis. *eos 

Survival curves were estimated with the Kaplan-Meier method on the randomised population and compared by a two-tailed logrank test.  *eos With p=0.05 and power of 0.80, 264 patients were  required (176 in the irinotecan group and 88 in the supportive-care group) to show a significant difference in 1-year survival from 20% (supportive care) to 35% (irinotecan).  *eos 

The randomisation was stratified by centre.  *eos A retrospective stratification was planned to take into account the baseline prognostic factors (sex, age, performance status, weight loss, presence of liver metastases, site of primary tumour, number of  metastatic sites, response to and duration of fluorouracil treatment as well as its intent [adjuvant or palliative],  haemoglobin, white blood cells, platelets, lactate  dehydrogenase, transaminases, alkaline phosphatase, bilirubin, protein, and carcinoembryonic antigen).  *eos 

The analysis was by intention to treat and patients were analysed according to the arm to which they were assigned.  *eos The association of prognostic factors with survival was estimated  with Cox's proportional hazards model for censored survival  data.  *eos Model selection for identifying the variables having an effect on survival was based on a forward stepwise procedure. p values to enter and to remove were 0.05 and 0.06, respectively.   *eos After the prognostic model had been determined, the effect of treatment after adjusting for other prognostic factors was  estimated by including it in the model.  *eos Survival without weight  loss of more than 5% survival without performance-status  deterioration, and pain-free survival were estimated by the   Kaplan-Meier method and compared with a two-tailed logrank  test.  *eos Quality-of-life variables were compared with multivariate and univariate analyses of variance on values at baseline, during  study, on patients' worst score over the trial period, and changes  from baseline.  *eos Kaplan-Meier estimates and logrank tests were done on time to definitive quality-of-life deterioration, with eight different thresholds for deterioration.  *eos 

Results. *eos 

Patients' data. *eos 

189 patients were randomly allocated irinotecan and supportive care and 90 patients were allocated  supportive care alone (figure 1).  *eos The patients' characteristics are shown in table 1.  *eos These characteristics were similar for both groups except for performance status (more patients having poor performance status in the supportive-care group were assessed by carcinoembryonic antigen only, with mean antigen ratios versus reference values of 2.24 and 2.83, respectively.  *eos 

Six patients in the irinotecan group did not receive  irinotecan.  *eos Irinotecan was given for a median of 4.1  (0.7-12.6) months and 172 (91%) patients received their  first infusion within 8 days of randomisation. 40 (21%)  patients in the irinotecan group received subsequent  anticancer chemotherapies (31 a fluorouracil regimen,  nine a drug other than irinotecan).  *eos In the supportive- care group 28 (31%) of patients received chemotherapy (21 a fluorouracil regimen, nine other drugs, and one irinotecan). 17 (19%) patients in the supportive-care  group received chemotherapy within 1 month  of randomisation compared with two (1%) in the  irinotecan group.  *eos Concomitant medications at baseline were similar in both groups and consisted mainly of  analgesics.  *eos 

Overall survival. *eos 

Kaplan-Meier estimates of survival are presented in figure 2.  *eos There were 123 (65%) events in the irinotecan  group, median duration of which was 9.2 (range 0-18.9)  months.  *eos The survival probability for this group at  6 months was 72.2%, at 9 months 52.6%, and at  12 months 36.2%.  *eos In the supportive-care group there were 71 (79%) events, the median duration of which was  6.5 (range 0.7-19.3) months.  *eos In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 54.1%, at 9 months 29.1%, and at 12 months 13.8%.  *eos Median follow-up was 12.9 months.  *eos Patients in the irinotecan group lived significantly longer than those in the supportive-care  group (p=0.0001).  *eos This benefit appeared after 2 months and became more apparent throughout the study period.  1-year survival was 36.2% and 13.8% in the irinotecan and supportive-care groups, respectively.  *eos Median  survival was 9.2 and 6.5 months, respectively.  *eos A univariate Cox's model showed that patients with  performance status 0 or 1 shared the same prognosis, which was notably better than that for patients with performance status 2.  *eos Figure 3 shows that the benefit of treatment occurred in all performance-status groups.   *eos With a performance status of less than two there were 98 (60%) events in the irinotecan group, median duration  of which was 10.5 (range 0.18-9) months.  *eos The survival  probability for this group at 6 months was 76.3%, at  9 months 57.2%, and at 12 months 40.1%.  *eos In the  supportive-care-alone group there were 53 (77%) events,  median duration 7.4 (0.7-19.3) months.  *eos In this group  the survival probability at 6 months was 62.5%, at  9 months 33.2%, and at 12 months 16.2%.  *eos With a performance status of two there were 24 (92%) events in  the irinotecan group, median duration of which was 5.1  (range 0.3-18.5) months.  *eos The survival probability for  this group at 6 months was 46.2%, at 9 months 26.9%, and at 12 months 15.4%.  *eos In the supportive-care group there were 18 (86%) events, the median duration of  which was 3.5 (range 1.1-11.0) months.  *eos In this group  the survival probability at 6 months was 26.5%, at 9 months 15.9%, and at 12 months 7.9%.  *eos Multivariate  Cox's regression confirmed the importance of other known prognostic factors (table 2).  *eos When the  treatment group was included in the model,the survival benefit for the irinotecan group remained significant (p=0.001).  *eos 

Secondary endpoints. *eos 

Survival without weight loss of more than 5% (p=0.018) and survival without performance-status deterioration (p=0.0001) were significantly longer in the irinotecan group.  *eos More patients with a performance-status of worse than 0 at baseline improved their performance status,  35% versus 11% (p=0.002).  *eos Pain-free survival in patients without pain at baseline (figure 4) was significantly longer in the irinotecan group than in the supportive-care group (p=0.003), despite a higher proportion of patients on opioids in the supportive-care group.  *eos There  were 61 (73%) events in the irinotecan group, median  duration of which was 6.9 (range 0.3-17.2) months.  *eos The  survival probability for this group at 6 months was 56.8%, at 9 months 36.6%, and at 12 months 18.8%.  *eos In  the supportive-care group there were 26 (79%) events,  median duration 2.0 (0.13.0) months.  *eos In this group the survival probability at 6 months was 31.5%, at 9 months  14.7%, and at 12 months 4.9%.  *eos Within 23 weeks of randomisation, the rate of patients with opioid  consumption by 3-week blocks ranged from 25% to 34% in the irinotecan group and from 40% to 56% in the  supportive-care group. *eos 

In the quality-of-life analysis, compliance of patients was about 80% in both groups at the beginning of study  and decreased during the study to about 50%.   *eos Compliance decreased more rapidly in the supportive-care group, probably due to earlier deterioration in the  patients.  *eos On difference from baseline multivariate  analysis of variance was significant (p=0.0001). *eos 

The univariate analyses of variance were significantly in favour of the irinotecan group for the cognitive functioning score (p.0.001), the global quality-of-life  score (p<0.001), the pain score (p=0.008), dyspnoea  (p=0.04), appetite loss (p<0.002), and financial-impact scores (p<0.001).  *eos The diarrhoea score was significantly better in the supportive-care group (p=0.02).  *eos Analyses on worst patient score during the study are shown in  table 3, all results were significantly in favour of irinotecan except for emotional, nausea, sleep  disturbance, and financial scores.  *eos Diarrhoea score was  significantly lower in the supportive-care group.  *eos Time to definitive quality-of-life deterioration was significantly longer in the irinotecan group, whichever the chosen threshold for deterioration (all p values <0.002).  *eos 

Safety. *eos 

Table 4 shows the incidence of grade 3 or 4 adverse events (drug related or not) by patient.  *eos Patients on supportive-care alone experienced a high incidence of severe adverse events, especially pain and asthenia, although significantly more patients in the irinotecan group experienced severe events, especially neutropenia, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea.  *eos Two (1.1%) of 183 patients treated with irinotecan died of drug-related causes although,in one, the association with adverse events (diarrhoea and/or febrile neutropenia) has not been clearly established.  *eos Admission for adverse events  occurred in 136 (72%) of patients in the irinotecan group and 57 (63%) of patients in the supportive-carealone group for a cumulative median of 15 (range 1.168) days and 11 (2.87) days, respectively.  *eos 

Discussion. *eos 

This study showed that treatment with irinotecan and supportive care alone, compared with supportive care, prolonged the life of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.  *eos This benefit was clinically meaningful because  the probability of surviving 1 year was 2.6 times greater in patients given irinotecan compared with that of patients given supportive care alone.  *eos Other efficacy endpoints, such as survival without weight loss, survival  without performance status deterioration, pain-free survival, and quality-of-life, were all significantly in  favour of irinotecan.  *eos 

The survival advantage for the irinotecan group remained highly significant after adjustment of performance status, a well-recognised prognostic  factor.  *eos More generally, the multivariate regression showed that the difference in survival between the two groups remained significant even after adjusting for the  effect of well-known prognostic factors.  *eos The survival data were also consistent with those observed in the phase II studies of irinotecan.   *eos 

The study also showed an advantage for irinotecan for quality of life.  *eos The results were consistent with other clinical variables (performance status deterioration, weight loss,and pain control).  *eos The analysis of the EORTC QLQ-C30 symptoms scale was consistent with the safety data.  *eos This suggests that the EORTC QLQC30 questionnaire is sensitive, contrary to a previous  report. *eos 

The safety profile of irinotecan was acceptable.  *eos The incidence of treatment-related grade 3 or 4 diarrhoea  with irinotecan (21%) was lower than that reported in previous studies (39%).  *eos This result, observed in a  multicentre trial, is probably accounted for by the more rigorous implementation of guidelines for the management of diarrhoea than in earlier studies.  *eos Grade 3.4 neutropenia was reported in 22% and grade 3.4 vomiting in 14% of patients.  *eos Asthenia, pain, and  neurological symptoms were more frequent in the supportive-care group.  *eos 

Some say that patients with advanced cancer who are treated with supportive care alone will have a short but  eaceful end to their life, protected from the side-effects of chemotherapy.  *eos Our study showed that as many as 67% of patients receiving supportive care experienced severe symptoms and as a result, 63% were admitted for a median of 11 days.  *eos Furthermore, irinotecan improved the symptoms of patients and delayed the onset of  tumour-related symptoms such as performance-status deterioration, weight loss, and pain.  *eos These data were supported by the quality-of-life analysis which suggested  that the side-effects of irinotecan were favourably  balanced by reduced tumour-related events.  *eos 

We have shown a survival advantage and a clinical benefit from second-line chemotherapy in patients with  metastatic colorectal cancer no longer responding to fluorouracil.  *eos Many patients had poor prognostic factors,  which implies that the results will be applicable in the  daily practice.  *eos The value of irinotecan was confirmed in  terms of survival, quality of life, and other clinical  variables.  *eos Irinotecan can therefore be recommended as the standard second-line therapy in colorectal cancer and as a new reference for forthcoming clinical trials.   *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
<DOC>
  <DOCNO>4017</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
Introduction. *eos 

Standard therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer is fluorouracil, commonly modulated by calcium folinate, which typically yields a median survival time of 10-14 months.   *eos Fluorouracil can be used as first-line or second-line therapy and a different regimen of fluorouracil can be administered as second-line treatment if first-line treatment fails.  *eos Survival time in these patients is typically short.  *eos Quality of life in patients receiving this treatment is generally poor. *eos 

Irinotecan inactivates topoisomerase I and thereby inhibits cell division.  *eos The drug has no cross-resistance with fluorouracil and functions via a novel molecular mechanism.  *eos Phase III studies of patients whose disease had not responded to first-line fluorouracil, or patients whose disease had progressed after first-line fluorouracil treatment, showed increased survival times in patients given irinotecan compared with those receiving best supportive care or high-dose fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone by continuous infusion.  *eos Data suggest that the development of well-tolerated regimens that combine irinotecan and high-dose fluorouracil and calcium folinate may be beneficial in the first-line treatment of colorectal cancer.  *eos 

Phase I dose-escalation studies were done to test combined irinotecan with fluorouracil and calcium folinate weekly or every 2 weeks.  *eos These regimens were selected for first-line treatment of advanced colorectal cancer, based on promising antitumour efficacy and an acceptable safety profile.  *eos The choice of regimen was left to investigators, according to local clinical practice, since the two regimens are widely used in Europe.  *eos The irinotecan combination and fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone were expected to differ by similar magnitudes in each regimen.  *eos Analysis of pooled data for efficacy showed that irinotecan gave a significant survival advantage.  *eos 

We did a phase III multicentre randomised trial that was designed to assess whether the addition of irinotecan to fluorouracil and calcium folinate would benefit patients previously untreated with chemotherapy (other than adjuvant) for metastatic colorectal cancer.  *eos 

Methods. *eos 

Patients. *eos 

From May, 1997, to February, 1998, we enrolled patients who met the following eligibility criteria, histologically proven adenocarcinoma of the colon or rectum, age 18-75 years, WHO performance status of 2 or less and life expectancy of more than 3 months, haemoglobin 100 g/L or more, absolute neutrophil count 2.0 10/L, platelets 150 10/L or more, creatinine 1.25 or less times the upper limit of normal, total bilirubin 1.25 or less times the upper limit of normal, aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase 3.0 or less times the upper limit of normal (if liver metastases present, 1.5 or less times for bilirubin and 5.0 or less times for aspartate and alanine aminotransferases), and no previous (other than adjuvant) chemotherapy, finished more than 6 months before randomisation.  *eos We obtained written informed consent from each patient before enrolment.  *eos Approval was obtained from the ethics committee of each participating centre.  *eos 

Patients with the following criteria were not eligible, central-nervous-system metastasis, unresolved bowel obstruction or diarrhoea, and known contraindications to fluorouracil (angina pectoris, myocardial infarction in the past 6 months).  *eos 

Study design. *eos 

We did the trial in 13 European countries, Israel, and South Africa.  *eos We randomly assigned patients irinotecan combined with fluorouracil and calcium folinate (irinotecan group) or fluorouracil and calcium folinate only (no-irinotecan group, figure 1).  *eos Randomisation was done centrally in the study sponsor's office by a computer-generated random scheme, and was stratified by centre.  *eos Before the start of the study, each investigator chose one of two proposed regimens for fluorouracil and calcium folinate, according to local clinical practice or preference (De Gramont [every 2 weeks] or Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internische Onkologie, cooperative German group for oncology [once weekly]).  *eos These regimens were used for combined treatment and fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone.  *eos 

For the irinotecan group, the regimens were, once weekly, irinotecan 80 mg/m with fluorouracil 2300 mg/m by 24 h infusion, plus calcium folinate 500 mg/m (n=54), or, every 2 weeks, irinotecan 180 mg/m on day 1 with fluorouracil 400 mg/m bolus and 600 mg/m by 22 h infusion, plus calcium folinate 200 mg/m on days 1 and 2 (n=145).  *eos For the noirinotecan group, the regimens were, once-weekly, fluorouracil 2600 mg/m by 24 h infusion plus calcium folinate 500 mg/m2 (n=43), or every 2 weeks, fluorouracil and calcium folinate at the same doses and administration as in the irinotecan-group 2weekly regimen (n=143).  *eos 

Treatment was given until disease progressed, the patient developed unacceptable toxic effects, or consent was withdrawn.  *eos Irinotecan was administered according to the guidelines used for irinotecan monotherapy, including recommendations for the use of concurrent antiemetics, atropine, and loperamide.  *eos We lowered doses for irinotecan and fluorouracil by 20% if severe toxic effects occurred.  *eos At the end of the treatment period, patients were followed up for progression every 3 months.  *eos Further cancer treatment was also recorded.  *eos During the follow-up period, we traced any continuing adverse effects related to the study treatment until resolution.  *eos 

Our primary endpoint was response rate.  *eos The secondary endpoints for efficacy were time to progression, duration of response, time to treatment failure, and overall survival.  *eos Time to progression was the time from randomisation to progression.  *eos The duration of response was the time from first infusion to progression in responding patients.  *eos The duration of response and stabilisation was the time from first infusion to progression in responding and stable patients.  *eos The time to treatment failure was the time from randomisation to treatment discontinuation or progression of disease, whichever came first.  *eos Survival lasted from the date of randomisation to the date of death.  *eos 

Responses were assessed after each treatment cycle, according to WHO criteria.  *eos For the weekly regimen, each treatment cycle was 7 weeks and for the 2-weekly regimen, 6 weeks.  *eos Tumours were assessed by an external response-review committee, which was masked to treatment group.  *eos 

We also assessed quality of life.  *eos We used the validated QLQC30 questionnaire of the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer.  *eos The questionnaire includes five scales for functioning, one scale for global health status, and nine symptom scales.  *eos Patients completed questionnaires before each cycle (every 6.7 weeks).  *eos 

Statistical analysis. *eos 

We needed to include 338 evaluable patients to show a significant difference in response rate between treatment groups, assuming response rates of 35% in the no-irinotecan group and 50% in the irinotecan group, by use of two-tailed X tests (a=0.05, power 0.80).  *eos 

Based on the assumption that time to progression would be 6 months in the no-irinotecan group and 9 months in the irinotecan group, we calculated that 286 patients were needed to show a significant difference for this variable.  *eos For analysis by two-tailed log-rank test (a=0.05, power of 0.80), with the assumption that accrual and minimum follow-up would last for 6 months and 9 months, respectively, we had to include 143 patients in each treatment group.  *eos To accommodate an anticipated 5% loss of patients to follow-up, we planned to include at least 151 patients in each group (total 302).  *eos 

We analysed the intention-to-treat population and calculated response rates for the intention-to-treat and evaluable populations.  2 tests were used to compare categorical variables between treatment groups.  *eos For continuous variables, we used Student's t tests.  *eos We estimated survival curves by the Kaplan-Meier method, and compared the two groups by the log-rank test.  *eos We tested for interaction between treatment and regimen by log-rank tests and, additionally, we did a log-rank test stratified by regimen.  *eos We constructed a country variable by separating the countries into three classifications, according to the number of patients included.  *eos The first group included countries that had recruited more than 30 patients (UK, Spain, France, Czech Republic, Germany, and Austria), the second countries that had recruited 10.30 patients (Belgium, Israel, South Africa, Switzerland, and Italy), and the third countries that had recruited fewer than ten patients (Greece, Portugal, and the Netherlands).  *eos We did log-rank tests stratified by this variable.  *eos 

Multivariate analyses were done on the intention-to-treat population.  *eos A logistic-regression model was used to identify the prognostic factors for response.  *eos We tested the nine following variables, sex, WHO performance status (<2 and <=2), weight loss (<=5% and >5%), number of organs involved (<3 and <=3), primary tumour site (colon or rectum), organ involvement (liver only or other sites), time from first diagnosis to first metastasis (0.3, >3-12, >12 months), previous surgery, and previous adjuvant therapy.  *eos For time to progression, Cox's proportional hazards modelling was used, with the following variables, sex, age (<58 and <=58 years), WHO performance status (<2 and >= 2), weight loss (<=5% and >5%), number of organs involved (<3 and >=3), primary tumour site (colon or rectum), liver involvement, lymph-node involvement, time from first diagnosis to first metastasis (0-3, >3.12, >12 months), previous surgery, previous adjuvant therapy, time from first diagnosis and first infusion (<9 and <=9 months).  *eos We based the selection of models of prognostic factors on a forward stepwise procedure, with the treatment being forced in the model.  *eos To enter and remove terms in the model we used p=0.08 and p=0.10, respectively.  *eos The time to definitive deterioration from baseline by 5%, 10%, 20%, and 30% was analysed by the Kaplan-Meier method.  *eos We used log-rank tests to compare the two groups.  *eos 

Results. *eos 

Patients and treatment. *eos 

387 patients were randomly assigned treatment. 385 patients received at least one infusion.  *eos Two patients received no study treatment because consent was withdrawn.  *eos Of the 385 patients treated in the study, only 97 (25%) received treatment by the weekly regimen (54 in the irinotecan group and 43 in the no-irinotecan group).  *eos The other 288 patients received treatment every 2 weeks (145 in the irinotecan group and 143 in the no-irinotecan group).  *eos 

Baseline demographic and pretreatment characteristics were similar in the two groups (table 1).  *eos A higher proportion of women were assigned fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone than the irinotecan regimen, and the rectum was the primary tumour site in a higher proportion of patients in the irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos 

Tumour characteristics and history in the two groups were comparable, except for previous surgery, since 89% of patients had had surgery in the irinotecan group and 95% in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos The frequency and profile of tumour-related symptoms and laboratory abnormalities were typical of advanced colorectal cancer and similar in the two groups.  *eos 

The median duration of treatment was longer in the irinotecan than in the no-irinotecan group, irrespective of regimen (24.0 vs 21.0 weeks for the weekly regimen, 24.6 vs 18.0 for the 2-weekly regimen).  *eos 

In the irinotecan group, the relative dose intensity was 0.82 for irinotecan and 0.81 for fluorouracil in the weekly regimen, and 0.93 and 0.92, respectively, in the 2-weekly regimen.  *eos In the no-irinotecan group, the relative dose intensity was 0.90 in the weekly regimen and 0.96 in the 2-weekly regimen.  *eos 

39.4% of patients in the irinotecan group and 58.3% in the no-irinotecan group received further chemotherapy, 31.0% of the no-irinotecan group subseqently received irinotecan.  *eos Similar proportions of patients received further treatment with oxaliplatin in the two groups (15.7 vs 12.8%).  *eos 

Efficacy. *eos 

In the evaluable population, the response rate was 49% in the irinotecan group, compared with 31% in the noirinotecan group (p<0.001).  *eos The confirmed responses (after 6.7 weeks) resulted in response rates of 41% (95% CI 33.3-48.6) and 23% (17.0-30.2), respectively.  *eos In the did not enable provision of an accurate estimation of the intention-to-treat population, response rate was also significantly higher in the irinotecan group than in the noirinotecan group (34.8 [28.2-41.9] vs 21.9% [16.2-28.5], p=0.005, table 2).  *eos The median time to onset of response was 8.9 (range 4.7-25.4) weeks in the irinotecan group medians.21 The probability of survival in the irinotecan group was 84.9% at 9 months and 75.5% at 12 months, and in the no-irinotecan group was 77.3% and 62.7%, respectively.  *eos In the intention-to-treat analysis of the 2weekly regimen, the response rate was, for the irinotecan and 11.4 (5.3-29.6) weeks in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos The median duration of response was 9.3 (2.8-13.1) months in the irinotecan group and 8.8 (3.7-11.8) months in the no-irinotecan group (p=0.08).  *eos Duration of response and stabilisation was longer in the irinotecan group (8.6 [1.6-13.6] vs 6.2 [1.1-11.8] months, p<0.001).  *eos Time to progression was longer in the irinotecan than in the noirinotecan group (median 6.7 [0+.13.8+] vs 4.4 group and the no-irinotecan group, 33.1% (95% CI 25.5-41.4) and 21.0% (14.6-28.6, p=0.021), median time to progression was 6.5 (range 0+.13.2) months and 3.7 (0+.13.1+) months (p=0.001), and median survival was 17.4 (0.4-28.3+) months and 13.0 (0.5-27.6+) months.  *eos The log-rank test was significant (p=0.0098).  *eos The probability of survival in the irinotecan group was 81.0% at 9 months and 66.7% at 12 months, and in the no[0+.11.8+] months, p<0.001, figure 2).  *eos The interaction between treatment and regimen was not significant.  *eos The log-rank test stratified by regimen and that stratified by country were significant (each p<0.001).  *eos Median followirinotecan group was 69.8% and 54.8%, respectively. *eos 

In the stepwise multivariate logistic regression (table 3), weight loss of 5% or less at baseline and time between first diagnosis and first metastasis were predictive of response. up was 23.3 (20.0-29.7) months.  *eos The effect of treatment was significant (p<0.001), the Survival in the irinotecan group was significantly longer hazard ratio for response was 2.6 times higher in the than in the no-irinotecan group (median 17.4 [0.4-28.4+] irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan group, given the same degree of weight loss at baseline and the same time between first diagnosis and first metastasis.  *eos In Coxs multivariate analysis of time to progression (table 4), age and number of organs involved were significantly predictive.  *eos In patients younger than 58 years, the risk of progression increased by about 28%, all other variables being fixed.  *eos If three or more organs were involved, the risk of progression was increased by about 56%.  *eos The treatment effect was significant (p<0.001).  *eos The vs 14.1 [0.5-27.6+] months, p=0.031, figure 3).  *eos The probability of survival in the irinotecan group was 82.1% at 9 months and 69.1% at 12 months, and in the noirinotecan group was 71.6% and 59.1%, respectively.  *eos The interaction between treatment and regimen was not significant.  *eos This finding supported the hypothesis that the difference in the two regimens would be similar in the two treatment groups and allowed the pooling of data.  *eos The log-rank test stratified by regimen was significant (p=0.03), as was that stratified by country (p=0.04).  *eos There was insufficient power to compare the efficacy risk of progression for a patient in the no-irinotecan group was increased by about 69% compared with that for a patient in the irinotecan group when all other variables were equal. *eos 

The median time to treatment failure was 5.3 (0.4-15.7+) months in the irinotecan group and 3.8 (0.4-11.5+) months in the no-irinotecan group (p=0.0014). *eos 

The time to definitive deterioration in performance status was significantly longer in the irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan group (median 11.2 [0.1+.15.7+]) vs 9.9 [0+.136+] months, p=0.046, figure 4 ).  *eos 

Safety. *eos 

In the irinotecan group, diarrhoea and neutropenia were the most common toxic effects in each regimen, and were significantly more frequent and severe than in the noirinotecan group.  *eos For toxic effects that occurred at a frequency of 3% or higher, diarrhoea was the most frequent grade 3 or 4 nonhaematological toxic effect in each of the treatment groups, irrespective of regimen.  *eos Grade 3 and 4 toxic effects occurring at a frequency of 3% or more are shown in tables 5 and 6.  *eos With the 2-weekly regimen, diarrhoea was more frequent in the irinotecan group than in the noirinotecan group, and the difference was close to siginificance in the weekly regimen.  *eos This adverse effect occurred more frequently with the weekly than with the corresponding 2-weekly regimen in the two treatment groups.  *eos Among patients receiving the weekly regimen, diarrhoea led to hospital admission for 17 (31.5%) in the irinotecan group and five (11.6%) in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos For the 2-weekly regimen, 16 (11.0%) patients in the irinotecan group and two (1.4%) in the no-irinotecan group were admitted for diarrhoea.  *eos Diarrhoea was the main reason for dose reduction or discontinuation of treatment in the weekly regimen, and neutropenia was the main reason for dose delay in the 2-weekly regimen.  *eos 

Grade 3 or 4 neutropenia and leukopenia were significantly more frequent in the irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan group, irrespective of regimen.  *eos In the irinotecan group, admission was required for fever in the absence of infection with concomitant grade 3 or 4 neutropenia for five (9.3%) patients on the weekly regimen and one (0.7%) on the 2-weekly regimen, for the no-irinotecan group, admission was required for one (2.3%) patient on the weekly regimen and none on the 2 weekly regimen.  *eos Asthenia was the second most frequent nonhaematological toxic effect in the irinotecan group, and grade 3 or 4 asthenia was significantly more frequent in this group than in the no-irinotecan group for the 2-weekly regimen.  *eos Grade 3 or 4 infection without grade 3 or 4 neutropenia was significantly more frequent in the irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos In the irinotecan group, about 25% of patients developed cholinergic syndromes that were rarely severe.  *eos 

Doses were reduced because of toxic effects more frequently for the weekly regimen than for the 2-weekly regimen, and more in the irinotecan than in the noirinotecan group.  *eos Doses were reduced in 29.6% of patients on the weekly regimen and 18.6% on the 2 weekly regimen in the irinotecan and no-irinotecan groups, respectively, and in 20.9% and 4.9% on the 2 weekly regimen.  *eos 

Most dose reductions occurred during the first two cycles in the weekly regimen.  *eos One patient treated with the irinotecan combination on the 2-weekly regimen did not receive appropriate therapy for the management of diarrhoea and died early in the first cycle, probably because of septic shock concomitant with grade 4 neutropenia.  *eos 

Despite the high frequency of side-effects, in the irinotecan group, the relative dose intensity was preserved compared with the no-irinotecan group.  *eos 

Quality of life. *eos 

1161 questionnaires were obtained from the 385 patients in the intention-to-treat population.  *eos The rate of return was similar in the two treatment groups.62% in the irinotecan group and 59% in the no-irinotecan group.  *eos The two groups did not differ significantly at baseline, except for cognitive function (mean 89.9 [SE 1.1] vs 86.1 [1.5], p=0.05).  *eos QL did not differ significantly between groups.  *eos When missing data for death, progressive disease, or grade 3.4 adverse events were taken into account with the two imputation methods, results were biased in favour of the no-irinotecan group.  *eos The analysis of variance on QL showed significantly better quality of life in the irinotecan group after the first imputation method was used (p=0.03).  *eos The same trend was seen with the second imputation method.  *eos 

Definitive deterioration in quality of life occurred consistently later in the irinotecan group, for a deterioration from baseline by 5% (p=0.03), 10% (p=0.06), 20% (p=0.04), and 30% (p=0.06).  *eos 

Discussion. *eos 

Combination of irinotecan with fluorouracil and calcium folinate significantly increased response rates, time to progression, and survival.  *eos The survival advantage was reached, despite a higher proportion of patients receiving further chemotherapy in the no-irinotecan group (58.3 vs 39.4%).  *eos 

This study population was large (385 patients treated), and the patients were representative of candidates for first-line chemotherapy in clinical practice, except that an unexpectedly high proportion of them had synchronous metastases at baseline and, consequently, a relatively low proportion of them had had previous adjuvant chemotherapy.  *eos 

The higher frequency of adverse events in the irinotecan group than in the no-irinotecan did not affect the median duration of treatment.  *eos The rate of grade 3 or 4 diarrhoea was similar to that previously seen with irinotecan administered as a single agent.  *eos Overall, toxic effects seen with the irinotecan combination treatment were reversible, non-cumulative, and manageable.  *eos 

No other combination therapy has shown such high antitumour efficacy over high-dose continuous infusion of fluorouracil and calcium folinate to date.  *eos In two phase-III studies, for oxaliplatin in combination with infusional fluorouracil and calcium folinate, the response rate and progression-free survival were better than with fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone.  *eos Those studies did not, however, show survival benefits.  *eos Moreover, there was a trend towards shorter survival in the oxaliplatin group in one study.  *eos Another phase III study that compared irinotecan combined with bolus fluorouracil and fluorouracil alone consistently provided significantly higher response rates (33 vs 18%, p<0.001) and median time to treatment failure (5.0 vs 3.8 months, p<0.05) in the irinotecan group.  *eos 

Moreover, irinotecan combined with fluorouracil and calcium folinate is the only treatment to show a survival advantage in metastatic colorectal cancer over high-dose continuous infusion fluorouracil and calcium folinate alone.  *eos 

The results we achieved with the irinotecan combination treatment show that the addition of irinotecan to weekly or 2-weekly regimens of fluorouracil and calcium folinate by infusion brings clear clinical benefit and should be considered as a first-line reference treatment in metastatic colorectal cancer as well as for advanced disease.  *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
