Monoclonal Antibody Therapy for Resected Dukes' C Colorectal Cancer: Seven-Year Outcome of a Multicenter Randomized Trial

Purpose: As previously shown, antibody treatment increased survival of patients with resected colorectal cancer of stage Dukes' C. Primary end points were overall survival and disease-free interval. The intentionto-treat analysis gave a significant effect for overall survival (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .01; log-rank, P = .02) and disease-free survival (Cox's proportional hazard, P = .02; log-rank, P = .1 1). This differential effect of 17-1A antibody on disseminated isolated tumor cells versus occult local satellites may explain the increased significance seen in the overall survival. Conclusion: The now-matured study shows that 17-1A antibody administered after surgery prevents the development of distant metastasis in approximately one third of patients. PATIENTS AND METHODS Patient Selection and Surgery
According to Zelen, these patients were included in the treatment group for final analysis, although they had not received antibodies.


Antibody and Antigen.
Patients and Causes of Ineligibility
Patient characteristics and distribution of risk factors for both groups were well balanced (Table 1) 3 A total of 189 patients were randomized between May 1985 and April 1990. the antibody. A final status of 185 patients could be obtained for this analysis. Nineteen patients (10.3%) were ineligible: seven in the treatment arm and 12 in the
observation arm. One patient had a competing neoplasm and one patient received postoperative radiochemotherapy. Since ineligibility was not biased by treatment assignment, these patients were excluded from further analysis. Survival.
After 7 years, a total of 87 deaths were observed in 166 eligible patients. Also, the intention-to-treat analysis (Fig B) on all 185 patients showed a significant overall benefit for the treated group (P < .01 with Cox's multivariate analysis, and P = .02 with log-rank test for the univanate analysis). Among all deaths recorded, six patients died without recurrence or secondary colorectal cancer and one observed patient of the control group died of secondary colon carcinoma, which was not counted as a recurrence. The median survival time before death after recurrence was 1.4 years for patients randomized to treatment with 17-1A and 1.2 years for patients in the observed group. 

Recurrence. 
According to the disease-free interval analysis, tumor recurred in 96 of 166 eligible patients after 7 years of follow-up evaluation; thus, three more recurrences were recorded m the treatment group and one more in the observation arm. Antibody treatment increased time to recurrence (P = .04 with Cox proportional hazards model corrected for influence of prognostic variables, and P = .07 with log-rank test for umvanate analysis). In this analysis, data on patients who died without recurrence were censored. When the analyses of recurrence-free interval and recurrence-free survival were performed including all randomized patients, ie, according to intention-to-treat, 17-1A treatment again led to significant advantage over the untreated group (Cox multivanate, P = .02, log-rank, P = .01, respectively). In summary, 46% of patients (41 of 90) in the treatment group are at nsk at 7 years and only 29% of patients (22 of 76) m the observed group are alive without recurrence. 

Pattern of Recurrence. 
As shown in Table 2, there is an excess of local recurrences in the treatment group, which may partially be explained by the longer survival of treated patients. Immune Response to 17-1A Antibody. 
When tested for antibody response against murine antibody (HAMA), 80% of treated patients developed a distinct HAMA response after the second or third nfusion. Patients who developed recurrences and those who remained tumorfree did not show a difference in antibody titers. In the antibody trial, both colon and rectum cancer patients were enrolled onto the trial presented here. patients was evident, after 2 further years, the overall survival did not show significance. The pattern of first recurrences beyond 5 postoperative years shows that patients in each group still recur, with
Patients in the control group continued to die of progressive disease that probably had arisen from occult distant metastatic cells that were elimnated by the antibody in the treatment group. In that trial, only colon cancer patients were treated who were known to have fewer local relapses than rectum cancer patients and were included in our trial. The dose of antibody chosen deserves a special comment. Antildiotype antibodies were detected in most HAMA-posltive samples. Why only one third of the patients at risk have responded to the antibody treatment may be explained by variations in accessibility, vulnerability, and/or antigen expression in individual disseminated tumor cells. Furthermore, humanized antibodies or entirely human antibodies generated from human mmunoglobulin gene hbrarles that are less Immunogenic than murine antibodies are now being tested. In conclusion, the presented results still support the original hypothesis that minimal residual disease occurring so frequently in patients with sohd tumors appears to be an indication for antibody therapy.

