While this treatment is relatively effective in small volume tumors, tumor control and survival decline as the bulk of pelvic disease and FIGO stage advance. The problem of enhancing pelvic control and survival cannot be approached simply by increasing conventionally delivered radiation dose since late complications produced by radiation are at the upper limit of acceptability with currently employed doses. These include modifications of radiation treatment volume or fractionation including extended field radiation, hyperfractionated RT, strategies to overcome the negative impact of tumor hypoxia such as hyperbaric oxygen, or hypoxic cell radiation sensitizers. In addition to modifications of radiation therapy multiple studies have investigated, and are investigating, strategies that combine radiation with chemotherapy either as neoadjuvant or concurrent administration. 

Concurrent chemotherapy with radiation offers a number of theoretical advantages over those of the neoadjuvant strategy. To date, the only reported randomized studies of concurrent therapy are those of hydroxyurea and radiation versus radiation alone. While these studies suggested some benefit for patients with FIGO stage IIIB cancer, methodological problems in the study have not resulted in wide acceptance of the conclusion of benefit from concurrent hydroxyurea and its concurrent use has not entered standard practice. In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FU to radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect. Stratum 2 included those with FIGO stage IIB disease with any lateral parametrial involvement or stage IIIB with involvement of one pelvic sidewall. Stratum 3 included those with FIGO stage IIIB and bilateral pelvic wall involvement or stage IVA. The partially hyperfractionated radiation fractionation schedule used equal fraction sizes of 160 cGy. 


Statistical Methods and Study Design 

The outcomes of interest in this study were pelvic control, survival, and disease-free survival, as well as the serious late complication rate. Ninety-nine patients were in stratum 1, of which 46 were stage IB/IIA and 53 were stage IIB. Compliance with the planned radiation schedules was good. In the standard radiation plus 5-FU arm (b), 52 of the 53 patients received the standard dose prescription. Seven of these 23 patients received a compensatory boost of external radiation in doses of 6 to 16 Gy. Of the patients randomized to receive standard radiation with 5-FU, four received no chemotherapy and three received less than 1 g/m2 with each course. The Kaplan–Meier plots of overall disease-free survival, disease-free survival for each stratum, and disease free survival by treatment assigned are shown in Figs. There 

is a trend in favor of standard radiation and 5-FU. The disease-free survival by treatment arm for the 99 patients in stratum 1 is shown in Fig. There was a significant improvement in 5-year survival and disease-free survival for those treated with standard radiation and 5-FU compared to the other treatments (log rank test P 5 0.05). Similar differences were observed in pelvic control, but the addition of 5-FU to standard radiation resulted in a greater improvement in disease-free survival than in pelvic control. The 5-year Kaplan–Meier survival was 62% for those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation and was not significantly different from the 58% survival of those treated with standard irradiation. The observed differences in pelvic control and survival in favor of the standard radiation and concurrent 5-FU associated with the addition of 5-FU rather than the change in radiation schedule. 


Stratum 2 was examined for differences in pelvic control and survival between the treatment arms and no significant differences were observed. Since significant differences in pelvic control and survival were observed in stratum 1 which contained only 99 patients, it is important to examine whether there was an uneven distribution of other possible patient or tumor-related prognostic factors across the treatment arms to account for the differences observed. For those receiving standard RT, the pelvic control rate was 60% but the disease-free survival was only 39%. If anything, there was a slight excess of larger tumors in those receiving standard radiation and 5-FU, the arm with the best outcomes. Eight occurred in those receiving standard radiation and five in those receiving altered RT. The radiation scheme used in this study conforms to those guidelines, although the inability to apply intracavitary radiation in 10% of these patients with advanced disease was 

disappointing. Patients were stratified into three groups in this study because pelvic control and survival outcomes are strongly influenced by the bulk of pelvic disease, declining with increasing bulk. However, in stratum 1 constituted of patients with stage IB/IIA and those IIB tumors with medial parametrial involvement, a significant improvement in both pelvic control and disease-free survival in favor of standard radiation with concurrent 5-FU was observed (Figs. The disease-free survival with standard radiation alone, however, was surprisingly low at 39%. A factorial analysis compared the outcome for all patients treated with concurrent 5-FU compared to those without 5-FU. A similar analysis compared all those treated with standard radiation to those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation. The direction of benefit in favor of 5-FU with standard radiation compared to the other treatments was the same in strata 1 and 2. The treatment related factors examined were the use of intracavitary radiation, the use of 5-FU, and the fractionation scheme, standard versus partially hyperfractionated. Hyperfractionated radiation and 5-FU should theoretically have offered a benefit over that of standard radiation and 5-FU if increased tumor cell kill results from any interaction between the modalities. The observation that 5-FU impacted more on survival than pelvic control in stratum 1 is difficult to explain. The number of patients is too few to recommend that concurrent infusional 5-FU with pelvic irradiation should become the standard therapy for these patients. The results of these additional studies will be influential in confirming whether the strategy of concurrent chemotherapy and radiation is beneficial for patients with advanced cervical cancer.
