Theoretical disadvantages of concurrent administration include increased acute toxicity which might limit or delay the delivery of definitive irradiation or increased late toxicity particularly if the drugs and radiation do not exhibit ‘‘toxicity’’ independence. Last, it is unlikely that concurrent chemotherapy usually given as only one or two doses would significantly reduce established distant micrometastases. While these studies suggested some benefit for patients with FIGO stage IIIB cancer, methodological problems in the study have not resulted in wide acceptance of the conclusion of benefit from concurrent hydroxyurea and its concurrent use has not entered standard practice. The success of concurrent regimens with these agents in patients with squamous cell carcinomas of other sites such as the anal canal and esophagus suggested that similar regimens were worthy of exploration in carcinomas of the cervix. In vitro data suggested that the addition of infusional 5-FUto radiation therapy would enhance the radiation effect. An earlier extensive phase I/II study of radical irradiation and infusional 5-FU based on the in vitro information establisheda safe regimen with acceptable toxicity for comparisonin this randomized study.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Between May of 1987 and August of 1995, 234 patients predominantly from two centers, with others participating,were stratified by their extent of pelvic disease and randomized to receive one of four possible treatments. The original statistical design required 292 patients but the study was closed early due to poor accrual. Stratification was based on a retrospective analyses which defined subgroups with different prognoses based on a combination of FIGO stage and pelvic disease volume. All patients were to have tumors 5 cm or greater regardless of FIGO stage (stages IB, II, IVA). Stratum 1 included those with FIGO stage IB/IIA or stage IIB with parametrial involvement limited to one or both medial parametria. Stratum 3 included those with FIGO stage IIIB and bilateral pelvic wall involvement or stage IVA. Patients were randomized to receive either (a) standardexternal beam pelvic irradiation (EBRT) in a dose of 5000 cGyin 25 fractions defined at 100% versus, (b) RT as in arm (a)with infusional intravenous 5-FU in a dose of 1 g/m2 daily onthe first and last 4 days of RT, (c) partially hyperfractionatedRT, 5280 cGy in 33 fractions, 2 fractions per day on the firstand last 4 days of RT, or (d) arm (c) with the same infusional5-FU. The radiation energy to be used was 6 MeV or greater. A posterior midline attenuator oftwo half value layers, 3 cm in width at the midplane of thepelvis was used to reduce the dose to the bladder and rectum. The attenuator was used throughout the treatment course inthose treated with a box technique and for half the fractions in those treated with a parallel pair. Intracavitaryirradiation was to be delivered as soon after external beam therapy as possible using a linear source without colpostats,usually of cesium-137. It was loaded to extend at least 2 cm above the clinically identified superior extent of disease and inferiorly to 1 cm below the cervix or 1 cm below the lowest extent of vaginal disease identified after external therapy. For rare patients with disease extension to the lower one-third ofvagina, the first application to the cervix and uterus was modified to deliver 30 Gy at 2 cm from the center of the sources anda second application as a line source in the vagina, was used to deliver a further 20 Gy at 0.5 cm depth from the surface of the vagina. 5-FU was given as an infusion from days 1 to 4 inclusive and on treatment days 22 to 25 inclusive. Where possible, chemotherapy infusion was given on four consecutive days without a weekend break. If a weekend break was necessary,the infusion was only given on radiotherapy treatment days. Appropriate guidelines for 5-FU dosage reduction or elimination were recommended for hematologic or mucosal toxicity,but RT interruptions were not. Figure 1 demonstrates the study design, the four-arm study was designed to determine whether any significantdifferences in outcome were evident between arms (a)and (d) and to be explanatory with respect to causation. Assuming that the magnitude and direction of the 5-FUeffects were similar in arms (b) and (d) then the effect of the addition of 5-FU could be tested by comparing arms (b) and (d)with arms (a) and (c). Additionally, the changed fractionation scheme with delivery of two fractions daily at thebeginning and end of therapy was designed to maximize thepotential for interaction between 5-FU and radiation and to potentially reduce complication rates. The effect of the fractionation was to be tested by comparing arms (c) and (d)with arms (a) and (b) (Fig. 1). In order to detect a 20% improvement in pelvic control rate from an expected 50% for arm (a) to 70% for arm (d) assuming an alpha of 0.05 and betaof 0.20, 73 patients in each of four treatment arms would be required for a total of 292 patients. This procedure uses the Kaplan–Meier method that calculates the ranked test pooled across the strataadjusting for strata differences. Additionally, statistics testing homogeneity over strata were computed and checked. The Kaplan–Meier method was used to calculate median follow-up duration, censoring patients who died. Cox’s proportional hazards model was used to examine the variables which might contribute to pelvic control or survival within stratum 1. Where information was missing for some parameters, single models were fitted for these parameters. Because patient accrual slowed considerably in the latter years of the study due to multiple factors including a decline ineligible patients, the study was terminated prior to reaching theplanned accrual goal.

Complications
Complications were considered acute and severe if occurring during or within 3 months from the end of radiation therapy and requiring hospitalization, e.g., diarrhea. Severe late orchronic bowel symptoms were those of fistula, perforation,stricture, or obstruction requiring hospitalization or surgery and bleeding requiring transfusion. Cytopenias were classed as grade 3 if bleeding or infection/fever occurred due tolow blood counts and grade 2 if neutrophils were less than1000 units/L or platelets less than 50,000 units/L.

RESULTS
Of the 234 patients randomized, 221 were evaluable. The median age of the patients was 48 years with arange of 23 to 85 years. For strata 1 and 2 the distribution of FIGO stage, tumor size, nodal involvement on lymphography,tumor grade, and capillary lymphatic space involvement (CLS)for each treatment are shown in Tables 1 and 2. Whereas there was once again a trend in favor of concurrent 5-FU, particularly in combination withstandard radiation, the difference was not statistically significant. The disease-free survival by treatment arm for the 99 patientsin stratum 1 is shown in Fig. 5. There was a significant improvement in 5-year survival and disease-free survival for those treated with standard radiation and 5-FU compared to theother treatments (log rank test P 5 0.05). The 5-year Kaplan–Meier disease-free survival for those irradiated without 5-FU was 48% versus 71% for those who received 5-FU (log rank P 5 0.02) (Fig. 6). When the radiation fraction size is reduced as in this altered fractionation scheme a compensatory increase in total dose over the same overall time is required to reach a biologically similar dose. Seven occurred in the group receiving 5-FU and six in thos ewithout 5-FU. Serious complications resolved (obstruction resolved or colostomy closed) in all but four of the patients. Given the low incidence of late complications it is not possible to establish an actuarial probability of risk with these regimens. The median duration of follow up on this series at 59 months is sufficient to observe approximately 80% of expected events. However, in stratum 1 constituted of patients with stage IB/IIAand those IIB tumors with medial parametrial involvement, asignificant improvement in both pelvic control and disease-free survival in favor of standard radiation with concurrent 5-FU was observed (Figs. 5 and 6). A similar analysis compared all those treated with standard radiation to those treated with hyperfractionated irradiation. The direction of benefit in favor of 5-FU with standard radiation compared to the other treatments was the same in strata 1 and 2. 