

It is the most active single agent for this disease' and, when used in combination chemotherapy,has
been shown to produce response rates that range from 55% to 82%.2 It has been suggested that
continuous treatment for advanced breast cancer compared with intermittent treatment improves
quality of life. 


However, in a large retrospective analysis reported by Schwartz et al, who used serial resting
radionuclide angiography with guidelines established for monitoring patients, the incidence,
severity, and morbidity of clinical CHF were reduced in patients at high risk for cardiomyopathy. 
Other studies have shown that following doxorubicin administration, a decrease in resting left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), in either absolute value or magnitude, was the strongest
predictor of clinical cardiotoxicity. 


Other methods studied to decrease cardiotoxicity include the use of anthracycline analogs and
iposomeencapsulateddoxorubicin.


To verify the results of this initial randomized trial, two multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
phase III trialswere initiated (designated 088001 and 088006). The primary objective was to confirm
the cardioprotective effect of DZR when used in a doxorubicin-based combination regimen in patients
with advanced breast cancer. 


Patients must have discontinued hormonal therapy more than 1 week or completed radiation therapy
more than 4 weeks before study entry. Patients were required to have an Eastern Cooperative
OncologyGroup (ECOG)24  performance status of 0 to 2 and adequate hematologic(WBC count 4 x 109/L or
granulocyte count 2 1.9 X 109/L, and platelet count 2 100 x 109/L), renal (serum creatinine
concentration 5 2.0 mg/dL), and hepatic (bilirubin concentration c 2.0 mg/dL) functions. 


Hence, within each site, four sets of codes were prepared, one for each stratum. These factors were
defined as prior mediastinal irradiation, age greater than 65 years, history of heart disease (ie,
previous MI, significant arrhythmia, or angina), hypertension or diabetes mellitus that required
medical treatment, and a baseline LVEF 0% to 10% above the LLN for the institution. Study 088006
began in May 1989 and both cardiac risk factors and disease measurability versus nonmeasurability
were included in the stratification. Drug Treatment Chemotherapy consisted of 500 mg/m2
fluorouracil, 50 mg/m2 doxorubicin, and 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, which were administered
intravenously (IV) on the first day of each treatment course DZR or PLA, designated as the blinded
study drug, was administered in a volume of 50 mL/m2 (10,1 ratio of study drug to doxorubicin) by
slow IV push or rapid-drip IV infusion. The placebo control contained 150 mg of lactose and 50 mg
mannitol (United States Pharmacopeia) lyophilized to form a pellet that resembled DZR. During the
first 9 months of the study, six deaths occurred on the DZR arm of 088001, five deaths occurred on
the DZR arm of a parallel study (088002, a small-cell lung cancer study using a 20,1 dose). 


A computer-based expert system was developed to ensure compliance with scheduled evaluations and
dose modifications. A computer-generated program calculated the patient's body-surface area and
recommended initial doses, dates for future treatments, and dose modifications or delays based on
the toxicity observed for each course Toxicity was graded using ECOG guidelines. 24 In addition,
follow-up tests were recommended at the appropriate times. 


Dose reductions due to hematologic toxicity were allowed for fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide, but
were not permitted for doxorubicin or DZR. The doses of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide were
reduced by 100 mg/m2 if the absolute neutrophil count (ANC) was less than 500 cells/pL and fever
occurred during a course, if the day-22 granulocyte count was less than 1.5 x 109/L, or if the
day-22 platelet count was less than 90 x 109 /L. 


Patients received a baseline evaluation before the start of treatment, including a history and
physical examination, tumor measurements, chest radiograph, complete blood cell (CBC) count, and
serum chemistries. 


Patients were removed from the study if they developed progressive disease, a cardiac event, or
other toxicity that precluded further treatment. Based on the patient's clinical manifestations and
the LVEF levels, the reviewer made a determination of whether, and in which course, CHF occurred.


Complete response (CR) was defined as the complete disappearance of all evidence of tumor, partial
response (PR) as 50% decrease in the sum of the products of two perpendicular diameters of all
measurable disease compared with baseline and no new disease activity, stable disease (SD) as a less
than 50% decrease in  measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) or less than 25% increase
in measurable disease over baseline measurements and no new lesions, and progressive disease (PD) as
2 25% increase of measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) over baseline, new lesions, or
unequivocal progression of nonmeasurable disease. 


The analyses presented in this report focus on 534 patients (349 on study 088001 and 185 on study
088006) who received the 10,1 dose ratio of DZR or PLA to doxorubicin and were randomized before
January 14, 1991. For patients in the DZR and PLA groups, the cumulative doxorubicin dose at cardiac
event was plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and the doses were compared using the log-rank and
generalized Wilcoxon tests. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate the hazards
ratio (HR), which indicates the overall risk of patients on the PLA arm who experienced an event
relative to a patient on the DZR arm. 


The reasons for no treatment in the other eight patients are patient refusal in four, physician
decision in one, pain that required radiation in one, study drug not available at site in one, and
patient not eligible for study in one (protocol violation for entry criteria). 


However, review of these forms indicated that the information largely consisted of patients who
received either right and left chest-wall irradiation only and who therefore may not have actually
received mediastinal irradiation.


Table 4 displays the number of patients who experienced a cardiac event, while Fig 1A and B shows
Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the DZR and PLA patients with regard to cumulative doxorubicin dose to
cardiac event. In study 088001, 1,494 scans were performed and the compliance rate was 92% and 91%
of the required tests in the PLA and DZR groups, respectively. A second review of all response rates
was performed by using only strict written response criteria with the reviewers again blinded to the
treatment arms. 


No statistically significant differences between groups were found using either the log-rank or the
generalized Wilcoxon test in study 088001 (P = .88 and P = .94) and in study 088006 (P = .23 and P =
.13). 


The only significant finding was a lower WBC nadir for patients who received DZR. 


Results of the analysis of patients who received DZR after 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin show significant
cardioprotection without impairment of antitumor efficacy compared with patients who never received
DZR and are presented in another report.25 A previous large nonblinded, randomized clinical trial
that compared FAC and DZR with FAC alone showed that DZR permitted breast cancer patients to receive
significantly more cycles and higher cumulative doses of on the DZR arm, as measured by serial MUGA
scans doxorubicin. Progression-free survival and overall survival were not different, although this
study was not designed to test antitumor efficacy. 


This question of interference may never be answered fully in the setting of metastatic breast
cancer, since a repeat randomized clinical trial to evaluate the use of DZR with the initiation of
therapy is unlikely to be performed.  Phase I studies of liposomal doxorubicin have shown a
different toxicity profile, with hand-foot syndrome and stomatitis found to be the dose-limiting
toxicities. 


Three reports have compared intermittent and continuous therapy for advanced breast cancer. The
second trial treated patients with six cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and fluorouracil
(CAF) then randomized them to receive cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF) or
observation.3 8 The median time to progression was shorter for patients randomized to the
observation arm (P < .001), but survival times were equivalent. However, chemotherapymay prolong
time to progression and therefore reduce tumor-related symptoms. Finally, a small randomized study
compared short-term and continuous mitoxantrone and resulted in no difference in time to
progression, response duration, or survival between the two groups. The net clinical benefit to the
patient must be the objective of future trials.
