The use of doxorubicin in different schedules to alleviate cardiotoxicity has also been evaluated. Both a weeklyschedule and continuous infusion were associated with a significantly lower incidence of cardiotoxicity,which suggests an association with lower peak plasma levels. Further attempts to decrease cardiotoxicity are based on a mechanistic approach. Myers et al found that the cardiomyopathy induced by doxorubicin is related to anthracycline-derived free-radical formation. Originally synthesized for its antitumor effects,'s dexrazoxane(DZR, ADR-529, ICRF-187, NSC 169780, Zinecard,Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc) has been shown to reduce the cardiotoxicity produced in animals by anthracyclines such as doxorubicin. DZR is a bis-dioxopiperazine compound that is hydrolyzed to form a chelating agent similar in structure to EDTA. DZR does not interfere with the antitumor effect of doxorubicin against the MX-I human breast tumor line at dose ratios up to 20,1. Also, DZR did not alter the rate of response todoxorubicin or increase the toxicity of the regimen. 

The primary objective was to confirm the cardioprotective effect of DZR when used in a doxorubicin-based combination regimen in patients with advanced breast cancer. Patients were required to have an LVEF at or above the lower limit of normal (LLN) percentage for the participating institution, obtained within 4 weeks before study entry. Patients with a documented history of CHF or cardiomyopathy, current arrhythmia, or myocardial infarction (MI) within 6 months before entry were excluded. They were also stratified on the basis of measurable versus nonmeasurable disease. All assignments to treatment and subsequent clinical assessments were made under double-blind conditions.

Drug Treatment
Chemotherapy consisted of 500 mg/m2 fluorouracil, 50 mg/m2doxorubicin, and 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, which were administered intravenously (IV) on the first day of each treatment course DZR or PLA, designated as the blinded study drug, was administered in a volume of 50 mL/m2 (10,1 ratio of study drug to doxorubicin)by slow IV push or rapid-drip IV infusion. Treatment was repeated every 3 weeks, provided recovery from toxicity had occurred. During the first 9 months of the study, six deaths occurred on the DZR arm of 088001, five deaths occurred on the DZR arm of a parallel study(088002, a small-cell lung cancer study using a 20,1 dose). During this interval, there was one death on the PLA arm of study 088002.

Dose Modifications
A computer-based expert system was developed to ensure compliance with scheduled evaluations and dose modifications. The investigator transmitted specified data by facsimile to a central data site at the time of a patient's registration in the study and before each course of therapy. A computer-generated program calculated the patient's body-surface area and recommended initial doses, dates for future treatments, and dose modifications or delays based on the toxicity observed for each course. Toxicity was graded using ECOGguidelines. 24 In addition, follow-up tests were recommended at the appropriate times. Treatment was delayed for 7 days if on day 22 the granulocyte count was less than 1.5 x 109/L or the platelet countless than 90 x 109/L. The doses of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide were reduced by 100 mg/m2 if the absolute neutrophil count(ANC) was less than 500 cells/pL and fever occurred during a course, if the day-22 granulocyte count was less than 1.5 x 109/L,or if the day-22 platelet count was less than 90 x 109 /L. Subsequent doses of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide were reduced by 50mg/m2 . Dose reductions for other toxicities were not permitted. A dose delay was defined as a period of at least 28 days since the previous cycle of treatment. The studies had no predetermined cumulative dose for discontinuation of doxorublcin. CBC counts were repeated weekly following courses I through 4, and subsequently before each course. Cardiac evaluation included baseline physical examination, ECG, and determination of the resting LVEF by multiple-gated acquisition (MUGA) nuclear scan. 

Off-Study Criteria
Patients were removed from the study if they developed progressive disease, a cardiac event, or other toxicity that precluded further treatment. There was no predetermined cumulative stopping dose of doxorubicin. The case report forms of patients reported to have CHF on or off study by December 31, 1993 were independently evaluated by a referee cardiologist who was blinded to the treatment arm the patient had received. Based on the patient's clinical manifestations and the LVEF levels, the reviewer made a determination of whether, and in which course, CHF occurred.

Assessment of Tumor Response
Tumor response was assessed using standard ECOG criteria. Complete response (CR) was defined as the complete disappearance of all evidence of tumor, partial response (PR) as 50% decrease in the sum of the products of two perpendicular diameters of all measurable disease compared with baseline and no new disease activity, stable disease (SD) as a less than 50% decrease in measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) or less than 25% increase in measurable disease over baseline measurements and none w/ lesions, and progressive disease (PD) as 2 25% increase of measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) over baseline,new lesions, or unequivocal progression of nonmeasurable disease. Complete regression of bone disease was defined as remineralization of all lytic lesions or disappearance of all areas of positive uptake on bone scan, partial regression was defined as remineralization of2 50% of lytic lesions without an increase in size of any lytic lesionor the appearance of new lesions. SD was defined as remineralization of less than 50% of lytic lesions and no new lesions, and PD as a measurable increase in size of any lytic lesions or the appearance of new lesions. 

Statistical Analysis
The analyses presented in this report focus on 534 patients (349on study 088001 and 185 on study 088006) who received the 10,1dose ratio of DZR or PLA to doxorubicin and were randomized before January 14, 1991. The 53 patients on the PLA arm who were still receiving treatment on January 14, 1991 and crossed over to open-label DZR were not censored after crossing over. All analyses performed were intent-to-treat analyses. An HR greater than 1.0 means an event is less likely on the DZR arm, whereas an HR less than 1.0 means an event is less likely on the PLA arm. The study was designed so that if the true HR of doxorubicindose at cardiac event was 3.0 in favor of the DZR group, the power to detect this difference would be .80 using a one-sided log-rank test, setting the alpha level at .05. The time to disease progression and survival were plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and compared using both the log-rank and the generalized Wilcoxon tests. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate the HR both for time to progression and for survival, both before and after controlling for three prognostic factors. Survival was defined as the time from randomization to death, and patients who had not died were censored at their last known date alive. Noncardlac toxicities, including hematologic and onhematologic toxicities, were separately tabulated for each study. Between May 1989 and December 1992, 326 patients from 65 institutions entered study 088006 and were randomized to receive FAC plus DZR or FAC plus PLA. They include patients randomized to the 20,1 dose ratio (study drug to doxorubicin) before the dose change. These patients received one or more cycles at the 20,1dose ratio. 
47) The median follow-up time on study088001 was 532 days (range, 1 to 1,863) for the 168patients who received DZR and 511 days (range, 1 to 1,652) for the 181 patients who received PLA. There were 34 patients taken off studies 088001 and 088006 for protocol violations, including one patient who was never treated. There were eight on the DZR arm and 15 on the PLA arm in study 088001, and six on the DZR arm and five on the PLA arm in study 088006. Reasons for protocol violations included ineligibility for study entry (n = 8), study drug scheduling, recording, ordosing problems (n = 18), ejection fraction changes that did not fulfill criteria for cardiac event, but patient taken off study by investigator (n = 7), and an 8-week treatment delay (n = 1). The log-rank test showed this difference between groups to be highly statistically significant (P < .001), but the generalized Wilcoxon test indicated borderline significance (P = .068).

In study 088006, the HR was 2.00 (95% CI, 1.01 to 3.96)and was statistically significant according to the log-ranktest (P = .038), but not statistically significant according to the generalized Wilcoxon test (P = .42). Five of these patients were alive, and in follow-up evaluation, 11 died of PD, three died of unknown causes, one died of a cerebrovascular accident, two died of CHF, and two died of PD with CHF. In study 088006, 821 scans were performed and the compliance rate was 90% and 88% in the PLA and DZR groups, respectively. 

Response Rate 
Results of the initial review of objective response rates (CRs and PRs) for patients with bidimensional measurable disease demonstrated a significantly higher objective response rate in patients on study 088001 who received PLA (63%) than in those who received DZR (48%) (P = .007, Pearson x2 test). 
56) 

Time to Progression and Survival
Figure 2A presents Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the DZR and PLA groups in study 088001 with regard to time to PD. Figure 2B is similar to Fig 2A, but presents the time to progression data in study 088006. 

Dose Modification
Beginning with cycle 2 and ending with cycle 7, the proportion of cycles with dose reductions (doses of fluorouraciland cyclophosphamide < 500 mg/m2) or delays(at least 28 days since previous cycle) for patients in each arm of both studies is listed in Table 6, there were no significant differences between arms. Toxicities were separately analyzed for each study and yielded essentially the same results as a combined analysis. Granulocyte counts were significantly lower at nadir for the patients on the DZR arms (P = .009). Platelet counts at nadir were significantly lower for the DZR arms (P = .004), but the differences consisted largely of grade 1 toxicity. Patients on the DZR arms had a 47% incidence of grade 1 thrombocytopenia, whereas patients on the PLA arms had a 29% incidence. The likelihood of developing a cardiac event was 2.0 to 2.6 times greater without the addition of DZR.
