
   THE ROLE OF DOXORUBICIN (Adriamycin, Pharmacia & Upjohn, Inc, Kalamazoo, MI) for the treatment of women with metastatic breast cancer is clearly established. It is the most active single agent for this disease' and, when used in combination chemotherapy,has been shown to produce response rates that range from 55% to 82%.2 It has been suggested that continuous treatment for advanced breast cancer compared with intermittent treatment improves quality of life. However, the ability to continue to administer doxorubicin to patients who have responded is limited by cardiotoxicity associated with increasing cumulative doses.4 Retrospective analyses indicates that the probability of developing congestive heart failure (CHF) increases from 0% to 3% at total cumulative doses of 400 mg/m2 , and to 18% to 31% at doses greater than 600 mg/m2.4 -5 
   Reported risk factors for the development of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity include prior radiation therapy to the heart, age. and a history of heart disease. Therefore, many patients with metastatic breast cancer who might potentially benefit from treatment with doxorubicin have been categorized as being at high risk for developing cardiotoxicity and are excluded from treatment. In two retrospective analyses, the mortality rate of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy ranged from 43% to 59%, when no prospective monitoring for cardiotoxicity was used. However, in a large retrospective analysis reported by Schwartz et al, who used serial resting radionuclide angiography with guidelines established for monitoring patients, the incidence, severity, and morbidity of clinical CHF were reduced in patients at high risk for cardiomyopathy. Although Schwartz et al showed a 16% incidence of CHF in high-risk patients, 87% of the CHF patients improved with medical therapy. Therefore, these established guidelines identified patients who could receive and tolerate higher doses of doxorubicin. This study demonstrated that empiric discontinuation of doxorubicin at a specified dose may not have been necessary. Other studies have shown that following doxorubicin administration, a decrease in resting left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), in either absolute value or magnitude, was the strongest predictor of clinical cardiotoxicity. Also, studies have shown that sequential radionuclide testing results in serial assessments of LVEF that are reproducible with a low intrinsic variability. 
   The use of doxorubicin in different schedules to alleviate cardiotoxicity has also been evaluated. Both a weekly schedule and continuous infusion were associated with a significantly lower incidence of cardiotoxicity, which suggests an association with lower peak plasma levels. Other methods studied to decrease cardiotoxicity include the use of anthracycline analogs and iposomeencapsulateddoxorubicin. 
   Further attempts to decrease cardiotoxicity are based on a mechanistic approach. Myers et al found that the cardiomyopathy induced by doxorubicin is related to anthracycline-derived free-radical formation. Originally synthesized for its antitumor effects,'s dexrazoxane(DZR, ADR-529, ICRF-187, NSC 169780, Zinecard, Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc) has been shown to reduce the cardiotoxicity produced in animals by anthracyclines such as doxorubicin. DZR is a bis-dioxopiperazine compound that is hydrolyzed to form a chelating agent similar in structure to EDTA. It is intracellularly hydrolyzed to its open-ring chelating form, which complexes with iron and thereby inhibits the generation of free radicals. DZR does not interfere with the antitumor effect of doxorubicin against the MX-I human breast tumor line at dose ratios up to 20,1. 
   In a prospective randomized trial, DZR was shown to have a protective effect against doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in women with metastatic carcinoma of the breast. Also, DZR did not alter the rate of response to doxorubicin or increase the toxicity of the regimen. 
   Therefore, afterJanuary 14, 1991, patients who were randomized to either arm of the studies and had received a cumulative dose of at least 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin subsequently received open-label DZR. Drug Treatment Chemotherapy consisted of 500 mg/m2 fluorouracil, 50 mg/m2 doxorubicin, and 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, which were administered intravenously (IV) on the first day of each treatment course DZR or PLA, designated as the blinded study drug, was administered in a volume of 50 mL/m2 (10,1 ratio of study drug to doxorubicin) by slow IV push or rapid-drip IV infusion. Treatment was repeated every 3 weeks, provided recovery from toxicity had occurred. In study 088001, the initial dose ratio of the blinded study drug (DZR or PLA) to doxorubicin was 20,1 (DZR 1,000 mg/m2). During the first 9 months of the study, six deaths occurred on the DZR arm of 088001, five deaths occurred on the DZR arm of a parallel study (088002, a small-cell lung cancer study using a 20,1 dose). Throughout study 088006, the dose ratio of study drug to doxorubicin was 10,1. 
   Dose Modifications. A computer-based expert system was developed to ensure compliance with scheduled evaluations and dose modifications. A computer-generated program calculated the patient's body-surface area and recommended initial doses, dates for future treatments, and dose modifications or delays based on the toxicity observed for each course Toxicity was graded using ECOG guidelines. 24 In addition, follow-up tests were recommended at the appropriate times. 
   Dose reductions due to hematologic toxicity were allowed for fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide, but were not permitted for doxorubicin or DZR. Treatment was delayed for 7 days if on day 22 the granulocyte count was less than 1.5 x 109/L or the platelet count less than 90 x 109/L. Dose reductions for other toxicities were not permitted. A dose delay was defined as a period of at least 28 days since the previous cycle of treatment. The studies had no predetermined cumulative dose for discontinuation of doxorublcin. 
   Patients were removed from the study if they developed progressive disease, a cardiac event, or other toxicity that precluded further treatment. There was no predetermined cumulative stopping dose of doxorubicin.The case report forms of patients reported to have CHF on or off study by December 31, 1993 were independently evaluated by a referee cardiologist who was blinded to the treatment arm the patient had received. 
   The analyses presented in this report focus on 534 patients (349 on study 088001 and 185 on study 088006) who received the 10,1 dose ratio of DZR or PLA to doxorubicin and were randomized before January 14, 1991. The 53 patients on the PLA arm who were still receiving treatment on January 14, 1991 and crossed over to open-label DZR were not censored after crossing over. For patients in the DZR and PLA groups, the cumulative doxorubicin dose at cardiac event was plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and the doses were compared using the log-rank and generalized Wilcoxon tests. Patients who discontinued treatment without experiencing any of the four cardiac events were censored at the cumulative dose received when they went off treatment. The study was designed so that if the true HR of doxorubicin dose at cardiac event was 3.0 in favor of the DZR group, the power to detect this difference would be .80 using a one-sided log-rank test, setting the alpha level at .05. Objective response rates (CRs and PRs) were compared using the Pearson X2 test in patients on the two arms with bidimensional measurable disease. 
   The time to disease progression and survival were plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and compared using both the log-rank and the generalized Wilcoxon tests. The PLA and DZR groups were compared by stratifying by study and using either the blocked Wilcoxon or Mantel-Haenszel test. 
   Also included are the patients who received the 10,1 dose ratio (study drug to doxorubicin) randomized before the amendment on January 14, 1991, and those randomized after that date. 
   The analyses presented in this report include only the 534 patients who received the 10,1 dose ratio randomized before January 14, 1991. This was to ensure a homogenous population of patients, since the dose and design of the trial were changed during the course of the studies. 
   Reasons for protocol violations included ineligibility for study entry (n = 8), study drug scheduling, recording, or dosing problems (n = 18), ejection fraction changes that did not fulfill criteria for cardiac event, but patient taken off study by investigator (n = 7), and an 8-week treatmentdelay (n = 1). 
   Disease characteristics for these 534 patients randomized before January 14, 1991 and who received a 10,1 dose on studies 088001 and 088006 are listed in Table 2. 
   The log-rank test showed this difference between groups to be highly statistically significant (P < .001), but the generalized Wilcoxon test indicated borderline significance (P = .068). The HR of PLA to DZR in study 088001, adjusted for six cardiac risk covariables (age, diabetes mellitus, history ofcardiovascular disease, hypertension, prior mediastinal irradiation, and LVEF within 10% of the institution's LLN), was 2.84 (95% CI, 1.71 to 4.71, P < .001, Wald X2 test). The HR for study 088006, adjusted for these six covariables, was 2.14 (95% CI, 1.06 to 4.33, P = .034, Wald X2 test). Response Rate Results of the initial review of objective response rates (CRs and PRs) for patients with bidimensional measurable disease demonstrated a significantly higher objective response rate in patients on study 088001 who received PLA (63%) than in those who received DZR (48%) (P = .007, Pearson x2 test). All patients with measurable disease who were enrolled onto studies 088001 and 088006 and who received a 10,1 dose are listed in Table 5. 
   The difference between groups was not statistically significant according to either the log-rank or the generalized Wilcoxon test (P = .27 andP = .45, respectively). This was the case when either the log-rank or generalized Wilcoxon test was used. No statistically significant differences between groups were found using either the log-rank or the generalized Wilcoxon test in study 088001 (P = .88 and P = .94) and in study 088006 (P = .23 and P = .13). 
   Dose Modification. When dose reductions and dose delays were analyzed separately, therewere still no significant differences between arms. 
   Because early analysis of these studies uncovered evidence of significant cardioprotection, in January 1991, patients on the PLA arm received open-label DZR starting with their seventh course or a cumulative dose of 300 mg/m 2 doxorubicin. 
   Three reports have compared intermittent and continuous therapy for advanced breast cancer. The first study found quality of life and timeto progression were significantly improved in patients who received continuous therapy. The conclusions were that if patients waited to stop therapy, survival would not be affected. In conclusion, two of these studies support continuous treatment with resultant longer time to progression. 