
   THE ROLE OF DOXORUBICIN (Adriamycin, Pharmacia & Upjohn, Inc, Kalamazoo, MI) for the treatment of women with metastatic breast cancer is clearly established. It is the most active single agent for this disease' and, when used in combination chemotherapy,has been shown to produce response rates that range from 55% to 82%.2 It has been suggested that continuous treatment for advanced breast cancer compared with intermittent treatment improves quality of life. However, the ability to continue to administer doxorubicin to patients who have responded is limited by cardiotoxicity associated with increasing cumulative doses.4 Retrospective analyses indicates that the probability of developing congestive heart failure (CHF) increases from 0% to 3% at total cumulative doses of 400 mg/m2 , and to 18% to 31% at doses greater than 600 mg/m2.4 -5 
   Reported risk factors for the development of doxorubicin cardiotoxicity include prior radiation therapy to the heart, age. and a history of heart disease. Therefore, many patients with metastatic breast cancer who might potentially benefit from treatment with doxorubicin have been categorized as being at high risk for developing cardiotoxicity and are excluded from treatment. In two retrospective analyses, the mortality rate of doxorubicin-induced cardiomyopathy ranged from 43% to 59%, when no prospective monitoring for cardiotoxicity was used. However, in a large retrospective analysis reported by Schwartz et al, who used serial resting radionuclide angiography with guidelines established for monitoring patients, the incidence, severity, and morbidity of clinical CHF were reduced in patients at high risk for cardiomyopathy. Although Schwartz et al showed a 16% incidence of CHF in high-risk patients, 87% of the CHF patients improved with medical therapy. Therefore, these established guidelines identified patients who could receive and tolerate higher doses of doxorubicin. This study demonstrated that empiric discontinuation of doxorubicin at a specified dose may not have been necessary. Other studies have shown that following doxorubicin administration, a decrease in resting left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), in either absolute value or magnitude, was the strongest predictor of clinical cardiotoxicity. Also, studies have shown that sequential radionuclide testing results in serial assessments of LVEF that are reproducible with a low intrinsic variability. 
   The use of doxorubicin in different schedules to alleviate cardiotoxicity has also been evaluated. Both a weekly schedule and continuous infusion were associated with a significantly lower incidence of cardiotoxicity, which suggests an association with lower peak plasma levels. Other methods studied to decrease cardiotoxicity include the use of anthracycline analogs and iposomeencapsulateddoxorubicin. 
   Further attempts to decrease cardiotoxicity are based on a mechanistic approach. Myers et al found that the cardiomyopathy induced by doxorubicin is related to anthracycline-derived free-radical formation. Originally synthesized for its antitumor effects,'s dexrazoxane(DZR, ADR-529, ICRF-187, NSC 169780, Zinecard, Pharmacia & Upjohn Inc) has been shown to reduce the cardiotoxicity produced in animals by anthracyclines such as doxorubicin. DZR is a bis-dioxopiperazine compound that is hydrolyzed to form a chelating agent similar in structure to EDTA. 
   Therefore, afterJanuary 14, 1991, patients who were randomized to either arm of the studies and had received a cumulative dose of at least 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin subsequently received open-label DZR. In study 088001, the initial dose ratio of the blinded study drug (DZR or PLA) to doxorubicin was 20,1 (DZR 1,000 mg/m2). During the first 9 months of the study, six deaths occurred on the DZR arm of 088001, five deaths occurred on the DZR arm of a parallel study (088002, a small-cell lung cancer study using a 20,1 dose). Throughout study 088006, the dose ratio of study drug to doxorubicin was 10,1. 
   Dose Modifications. A computer-based expert system was developed to ensure compliance with scheduled evaluations and dose modifications. A computer-generated program calculated the patient's body-surface area and recommended initial doses, dates for future treatments, and dose modifications or delays based on the toxicity observed for each course Toxicity was graded using ECOG guidelines. 24 In addition, follow-up tests were recommended at the appropriate times. 
   Dose reductions due to hematologic toxicity were allowed for fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide, but were not permitted for doxorubicin or DZR. Dose reductions for other toxicities were not permitted. A dose delay was defined as a period of at least 28 days since the previous cycle of treatment. The studies had no predetermined cumulative dose for discontinuation of doxorublcin. 
   There was no predetermined cumulative stopping dose of doxorubicin.The case report forms of patients reported to have CHF on or off study by December 31, 1993 were independently evaluated by a referee cardiologist who was blinded to the treatment arm the patient had received. 
   The analyses presented in this report focus on 534 patients (349 on study 088001 and 185 on study 088006) who received the 10,1 dose ratio of DZR or PLA to doxorubicin and were randomized before January 14, 1991. For patients in the DZR and PLA groups, the cumulative doxorubicin dose at cardiac event was plotted using Kaplan-Meier curves and the doses were compared using the log-rank and generalized Wilcoxon tests. The study was designed so that if the true HR of doxorubicin dose at cardiac event was 3.0 in favor of the DZR group, the power to detect this difference would be .80 using a one-sided log-rank test, setting the alpha level at .05. 
   Also included are the patients who received the 10,1 dose ratio (study drug to doxorubicin) randomized before the amendment on January 14, 1991, and those randomized after that date. 
   The analyses presented in this report include only the 534 patients who received the 10,1 dose ratio randomized before January 14, 1991. This was to ensure a homogenous population of patients, since the dose and design of the trial were changed during the course of the studies. 
   Reasons for protocol violations included ineligibility for study entry (n = 8), study drug scheduling, recording, or dosing problems (n = 18), ejection fraction changes that did not fulfill criteria for cardiac event, but patient taken off study by investigator (n = 7), and an 8-week treatmentdelay (n = 1). 
   Disease characteristics for these 534 patients randomized before January 14, 1991 and who received a 10,1 dose on studies 088001 and 088006 are listed in Table 2. 
   The log-rank test showed this difference between groups to be highly statistically significant (P < .001), but the generalized Wilcoxon test indicated borderline significance (P = .068). The difference between the results analyzed by the log-rank test andthose analyzed by the generalized Wilcoxon test was due to the emphasis of the generalized Wilcoxon test on events that occur early in the study. Although there was little difference between the two groups at cumulative doses up to 400 to 500 mg/m2, there was a substantial difference between these two groups at cumulative doses above this level. All patients with measurable disease who were enrolled onto studies 088001 and 088006 and who received a 10,1 dose are listed in Table 5. The differences between the objective response rates in the DZR and PLA arm were -14% (95% CI, -25% to -2%, P = .019) in study 88001 and 4% (95% CI, -13% to 22%, P = .63) in study 088006. The response rate for patients on study 088001 who had received prior chemotherapy was 41% on the DZR arm versus 58% on the PLA arm, a difference of 17% (95% CI, -36% to 2%, P = .072), and for patients who had received prior hormonal therapy was 45% for the DZR arm and 61% for the PLA arm, a difference of 16% (95% CI, -33% to 1%, P = .065). Response rates for patients on study 088006 who had received previous chemotherapy for the DZR arm were 53% and for the PLA arm were 52%, a difference of 1% (95% CI, -30% to 32%, P = .95), and for previous hormonal therapy or the DZR arm were 44% and for the PLA arm were 53%, a difference of 9% (95% CI, -35% to 17%, P = .50). 
   The difference between groups was not statistically significant according to the log-rank test (P = .23), but was of borderline significance according to the generalized Wilcoxon test (P = .10). The difference in time to progression between treatment arms after controlling for three prognostic factors (prior chemotherapy, number of disease sites, and disease measurability) was not statistically significant. 
   The difference between groups was not statistically significant according to either the log-rank or the generalized Wilcoxon test (P = .27 andP = .45, respectively). The difference was not statistically significant after controlling for the three prognostic factors listed earlier. No statistically significant differences between groups were found using either the log-rank or the generalized Wilcoxon test in study 088001 (P = .88 and P = .94) and in study 088006 (P = .23 and P = .13). The differences were not significant in either study after controlling for the previously listed prognostic factors. 
   Dose Modification. Beginning with cycle 2 and ending with cycle 7, the proportion of cycles with dose reductions (doses of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide < 500 mg/m2) or delays (at least 28 days since previous cycle) for patients in each arm of both studies is listed in Table 6, there were no significant differences between arms. When dose reductions and dose delays were analyzed separately, therewere still no significant differences between arms. In addition, there was no significant difference in the median number of cycles received per treatment arm in either study, the median number for each arm was six. 
   Platelet counts at nadir were significantly lower for the DZRarms (P = .004), but the differences consisted largely of grade 1 toxicity. Differences in the higher grades (2, 3, and 4) were minor. Platelet counts at recovery were significantly lower for the patients on the PLA arms (P = .003), and the differences consisted mostly of grade 1 toxicity. There were no differences between treatment arms in the incidence of hemorrhage, fever,sepsis, or infection. 
   For nonhematologic toxicities, pain on injection was more frequent and severe on the DZR arms than on the PLA arms (P = .001), but the difference was mainly in grades 1 or 2. There were some differences of borderline statistical significance, stomatitis and esophagitis were more severe on the PLA arm (P = .071 and P = .087, respectively). There were no statistically significant differences between the DZR and PLA arms in serum chemistry findings. 
   Because early analysis of these studies uncovered evidence of significant cardioprotection, in January 1991, patients on the PLA arm received open-label DZR starting with their seventh course or a cumulative dose of 300 mg/m 2 doxorubicin. There were no differences in objective response rates or noncardiac toxicity between treatment arms. 
   Also, in specifically evaluating responses in patients who had received previous chemotherapy or patients who had received previous hormonal therapy, the difference in response rates was of borderline significance. Phase I studies of liposomal doxorubicin have shown a different toxicity profile, with hand-foot syndrome and stomatitis found to be the dose-limiting toxicities. 