

It is the most active single agent for this disease' and, when used in combination chemotherapy,has
been shown to produce response rates that range from 55% to 82%.2 It has been suggested that
continuous treatment for advanced breast cancer compared with intermittent treatment improves
quality of life. 


However, in a large retrospective analysis reported by Schwartz et al, who used serial resting
radionuclide angiography with guidelines established for monitoring patients, the incidence,
severity, and morbidity of clinical CHF were reduced in patients at high risk for cardiomyopathy. 
Other studies have shown that following doxorubicin administration, a decrease in resting left
ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF), in either absolute value or magnitude, was the strongest
predictor of clinical cardiotoxicity. 


The primary objective was to confirm the cardioprotective effect of DZR when used in a
doxorubicin-based combination regimen in patients with advanced breast cancer. 


Patients must have discontinued hormonal therapy more than 1 week or completed radiation therapy
more than 4 weeks before study entry. Patients were required to have an Eastern Cooperative
OncologyGroup (ECOG)24  performance status of 0 to 2 and adequate hematologic(WBC count 4 x 109/L or
granulocyte count 2 1.9 X 109/L, and platelet count 2 100 x 109/L), renal (serum creatinine
concentration 5 2.0 mg/dL), and hepatic (bilirubin concentration c 2.0 mg/dL) functions. Patients
with a documented history of CHF or cardiomyopathy, current arrhythmia, or myocardial infarction
(MI) within 6 months before entry were excluded. 


In study 088001, patients were initially stratified (in February 1988) within each center as to the
presence or absence of one or more cardiac risk factors. Study 088006 began in May 1989 and both
cardiac risk factors and disease measurability versus nonmeasurability were included in the
stratification. Drug Treatment Chemotherapy consisted of 500 mg/m2 fluorouracil, 50 mg/m2
doxorubicin, and 500 mg/m2 cyclophosphamide, which were administered intravenously (IV) on the first
day of each treatment course DZR or PLA, designated as the blinded study drug, was administered in a
volume of 50 mL/m2 (10,1 ratio of study drug to doxorubicin) by slow IV push or rapid-drip IV
infusion. The placebo control contained 150 mg of lactose and 50 mg mannitol (United States
Pharmacopeia) lyophilized to form a pellet that resembled DZR. 


A computer-generated program calculated the patient's body-surface area and recommended initial
doses, dates for future treatments, and dose modifications or delays based on the toxicity observed
for each course Toxicity was graded using ECOG guidelines. 24 In addition, follow-up tests were
recommended at the appropriate times. 


The doses of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide were reduced by 100 mg/m2 if the absolute neutrophil
count (ANC) was less than 500 cells/pL and fever occurred during a course, if the day-22 granulocyte
count was less than 1.5 x 109/L, or if the day-22 platelet count was less than 90 x 109 /L. 


Patients received a baseline evaluation before the start of treatment, including a history and
physical examination, tumor measurements, chest radiograph, complete blood cell (CBC) count, and
serum chemistries. 


Patients were removed from the study if they developed progressive disease, a cardiac event, or
other toxicity that precluded further treatment. Cardiac events were defined as a decline in LVEF
from baseline of 2 10% below the institution's LLN, a decline in LVEFof at least 20% from baseline,
a decline in LVEF to at least 5% below the institution's LLN, or the development of CHF while on
study with two or more of the following, cardiomegaly established by radiography, basilar rales, S3
gallop, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea, orthopnea, or significant dyspnea on exertion. Based on the
patient's clinical manifestations and the LVEF levels, the reviewer made a determination of whether,
and in which course, CHF occurred.


Complete response (CR) was defined as the complete disappearance of all evidence of tumor, partial
response (PR) as 50% decrease in the sum of the products of two perpendicular diameters of all
measurable disease compared with baseline and no new disease activity, stable disease (SD) as a less
than 50% decrease in  measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) or less than 25% increase
in measurable disease over baseline measurements and no new lesions, and progressive disease (PD) as
2 25% increase of measurable disease (sum of bidimensional products) over baseline, new lesions, or
unequivocal progression of nonmeasurable disease. Complete regression of bone disease was defined as
remineralization of all lytic lesions or disappearance of all areas of positive uptake on bone scan,
partial regression was defined as remineralization of 50% of lytic lesions without an increase in
size of any lytic lesionor the appearance of new lesions. 


For patients in the DZR and PLA groups, the cumulative doxorubicin dose at cardiac event was plotted
using Kaplan-Meier curves and the doses were compared using the log-rank and generalized Wilcoxon
tests. The Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate the hazards ratio (HR), which
indicates the overall risk of patients on the PLA arm who experienced an event relative to a patient
on the DZR arm. The study was designed so that if the true HR of doxorubicin dose at cardiac event
was 3.0 in favor of the DZR group, the power to detect this difference would be .80 using a
one-sided log-rank test, setting the alpha level at .05. 


The reasons for no treatment in the other eight patients are patient refusal in four, physician
decision in one, pain that required radiation in one, study drug not available at site in one, and
patient not eligible for study in one (protocol violation for entry criteria). Reasons for protocol
violations included ineligibility for study entry (n = 8), study drug scheduling, recording, or
dosing problems (n = 18), ejection fraction changes that did not fulfill criteria for cardiac event,
but patient taken off study by investigator (n = 7), and an 8-week treatmentdelay (n = 1).


However, review of these forms indicated that the information largely consisted of patients who
received either right and left chest-wall irradiation only and who therefore may not have actually
received mediastinal irradiation.


Table 4 displays the number of patients who experienced a cardiac event, while Fig 1A and B shows
Kaplan-Meier curves comparing the DZR and PLA patients with regard to cumulative doxorubicin dose to
cardiac event. The HR of PLA to DZR in study 088001, adjusted for six cardiac risk covariables (age,
diabetes mellitus, history ofcardiovascular disease, hypertension, prior mediastinal irradiation,
and LVEF within 10% of the institution's LLN), was 2.84 (95% CI, 1.71 to 4.71, P < .001, Wald X2
test). The two patients (one on study 088001 and one on study 088006) who died of CHF were on the
PLA arm and had received 450 mg/m2 and 500 mg/m2 of doxorubicin. In study 088001, 1,494 scans were
performed and the compliance rate was 92% and 91% of the required tests in the PLA and DZR groups,
respectively. These responses were obtained by reviewers who were blinded to the treatment and used
clinical judgment along with response criteria to obtain results. Response rates for patients on
study 088006 who had received previous chemotherapy for the DZR arm were 53% and for the PLA arm
were 52%, a difference of 1% (95% CI, -30% to 32%, P = .95), and for previous hormonal therapy or
the DZR arm were 44% and for the PLA arm were 53%, a difference of 9% (95% CI, -35% to 17%, P =
.50).


Beginning with cycle 2 and ending with cycle 7, the proportion of cycles with dose reductions (doses
of fluorouracil and cyclophosphamide < 500 mg/m2) or delays (at least 28 days since previous cycle)
for patients in each arm of both studies is listed in Table 6, there were no significant differences
between arms. When dose reductions and dose delays were analyzed separately, therewere still no
significant differences between arms. 


The only significant finding was a lower WBC nadir for patients who received DZR. 


Because early analysis of these studies uncovered evidence of significant cardioprotection, in
January 1991, patients on the PLA arm received open-label DZR starting with their seventh course or
a cumulative dose of 300 mg/m 2 doxorubicin. Results of the analysis of patients who received DZR
after 300 mg/m2 of doxorubicin show significant cardioprotection without impairment of antitumor
efficacy compared with patients who never received DZR and are presented in another report.25 A
previous large nonblinded, randomized clinical trial that compared FAC and DZR with FAC alone showed
that DZR permitted breast cancer patients to receive significantly more cycles and higher cumulative
doses of on the DZR arm, as measured by serial MUGA scans doxorubicin. The current reported studies
were designed to test the hypothesis that DZR reduces doxorubicin-associated cardiotoxicity. 


Because a definite survival benefit is seen with anthracycline-containing adjuvant therapy in
subsets of patients, extreme caution must be used before an agent that may decrease tumor
responsiveness is included. A recent report suggests that probucol, a lipidlowering agent with
antioxidant properties, protects against doxorubicin-associated cardiomyopathy in rats. 


The second trial treated patients with six cycles of cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, and fluorouracil
(CAF) then randomized them to receive cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil (CMF) or
observation.3 8 The median time to progression was shorter for patients randomized to the
observation arm (P < .001), but survival times were equivalent. Finally, a small randomized study
compared short-term and continuous mitoxantrone and resulted in no difference in time to
progression, response duration, or survival between the two groups. 
