The preferred treatment of women with early-stage cervical cancer (FIGO IA2ñIIA) is radical hysterectomy with 
bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy. The procedure is well tolerated, with minimal associated morbidity and rare mortality. The overall prognosis for patients undergoing radical hysterectomy is good, with reported 5-year survival 
rates ranging from 75 to 90%. However, among patients 
with a clinically early cancer, there are prognostic features 
which identify patients at increased risk for recurrence; recurrent cervical cancer after initial radical hysterectomy and 
pelvic lymphadenectomy has a poor prognosis, with a reported 5-year survival rate of 5% or less. 

The clinicopathologic factors which predict a poorer prognosis for patients with an early carcinoma of the cervix 
have been well established. A retrospective study of patients 
undergoing radical hysterectomy at Memorial SloanñKettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) from 1939 to 1977 identified 
the following risk factors: metastatic tumor to the pelvic 
lymph nodes, large cervical tumor, parametrial extension of 
disease, nonsquamous or grade 3 histology, and deep 
(.75%) cervical stromal invasion. These factors have 
been shown to be associated with a high risk of recurrence 
in other studies, both from single institutions and from cooperative groups. 

There have been multiple studies published which have 
retrospectively analyzed the outcome of patients at risk for 
recurrence who received adjuvant therapy compared to those 
patients not receiving adjuvant therapy. Whole pelvic postoperative radiation therapy has been found to possibly decrease the incidence of local/regional recurrence with little 
or no effect on overall survival. Chemotherapy plus 
pelvic radiation has been studied in our institution in a prospective Phase II trial, with an apparent improvement in 
survival rates when compared to historical controls. 
Preoperative neoadjuvant chemotherapy has been reported 
as another approach to management of women with early 
cervical cancer and high-risk features. Few reports 
have utilized adjuvant postoperative chemotherapy alone 
after radical surgery for invasive cervical cancer. In an 
effort to determine whether the improved survival in the 
Memorial Hospital Phase II trial was due to the combination 
of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy or due to the 
effect of the chemotherapy alone, a multicenter randomized 
Phase III clinical trial was designed. This report summarizes 
the preliminary results of the trial which closed to patient 
accrual in June 1994. 

MATERIALS AND METHODS 

Patients with clinical Stage IBñIIA cancer of the uterine 
cervix treated by radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic 
lymphadenectomy, and aortic lymph node sampling were 
eligible for entry into this prospective study if they had one 
or more of the following risk factors: (1) metastatic disease 
to pelvic lymph nodes, (2) large primary tumors greater than 
or equal to 4 cm in diameter, (3) deeply invasive lesions with 
75% or greater stromal invasion, (4) nonsquamous histology, 
and/or (5) occult parametrial involvement or positive surgical margins. Patients who met the entry criteria were given 
the opportunity to participate in this clinical trial; entry and 
initiation of therapy had to be within 6 weeks of the date of 
radical hysterectomy. Patients were assigned a stage based 
on International Federation of Gynecologists and Obstetricians (FIGO) criteria. After signing an IRB-approved 
informed consent form, patients were randomized to receive 
one of two treatments. One arm consisted of 2 cycles of 
chemotherapy (given 3ñ4 weeks apart) utilizing bleomycin 
20 U/m2/day via continuous 24-hr infusion on Days 1ñ3 
after an initial intravenous bolus of 20 U/m2 followed by 
cisplatin 75 mg/m2 by iv infusion on Day 4. Following recovery from the second cycle of chemotherapy, patients received 
a course of whole pelvic radiation therapy to a dose of 45 
Gy, delivered in 20 fractions via a four-field technique; patients did not receive intravaginal therapy. Two additional 
cycles of cisplatin alone (75 mg/m2) were prescribed after 
completion of the pelvic radiation therapy. In the second 
arm of the study, patients were randomized to treatment 
with a similar regimen of chemotherapy as described above 
without pelvic radiation; following the first two cycles of 
cisplatin and bleomycin, the patient then received the third 
and fourth treatment of cisplatin alone at 3-to 4-week intervals. 

Four centers participated in this clinical trial. At each 
institution, the protocol was approved by the institutional 
review board prior to entry of patients; all patients signed 
an informed consent prior to entry. Central pathology review 
was not required, although at each institution the specific 
pathologic criteria for determining depth of invasion were 
carried out according to written guidelines. Randomization 

was performed at Memorial SloanñKettering Cancer Center 
by the Department of Biostatistics using an envelope system. 
Data forms were maintained in a central location, also at 
MSKCC. 

Additional entry criteria included histologic confirmation 
of negative para-aortic lymph nodes, normal renal function 
(creatinine clearance of greater than 60 ml/min), normal liver 
function tests, hemoglobin of greater than 8.0 g/dl, and a 
normal DLCO pulmonary function test. 

At the completion of treatment, patients were followed 
according to the individual surgeonsí preference. Patients 
with recurrent disease were classified by the site of recurrence and the interval from the date of radical hysterectomy 
to the date of recurrence. 

The initial accrual goal of the trial was 160 patients, with 
80 patients randomized to each of the two treatment arms. 
The null hypothesis considered that the two treatment arms, 
chemotherapy alone and chemotherapy plus radiation, would 
both result in 5-year disease-free survival of 70%. The alternative hypothesis considered that chemotherapy alone would 
result in a 5-year disease-free survival of 20% less or 50% 
(significance level of 0.05 and a power of 0.80). The estimated duration of the trial when it opened in 1987 was 4ñ 
5 years. The trial was closed to patient entry in June 1994 
due to less than optimal accrual. 

Overall and disease-free survival curves were computed 
using the method of KaplanñMeier and the differences 
in survival were compared by the log-rank method. 

RESULTS 

Between 1987 and 1994, a total of 89 patients were entered 
into the trial; 45 patients were entered at MSKCC, 24 from 

the Mayo Clinic, and 10 each from the Uniform Services Health undergone a radical hysterectomy, bilateral pelvic lymphade-
Center and the University of Miami. The average age of the nectomy, and periaortic lymph node sampling within 6 weeks 
patients was 45 years and patients ranged in age from 23 to of entry into the trial. Twenty-five patients had 3 or more high70 years. Seventy-five patients had a Stage IB cervical cancer risk factors and 64 had 1 to 2 risk factors; 33 of these patients 
and the remaining 14 patients had a Stage IIA cancer. All had 1 risk factor. Additional histopathologic features of the 
patients met the entry criteria for surgical procedures and had patients are presented in Table 1. 

Forty-five patients were randomized to the chemotherapy withdrawn by the institutional principal investigator due to 
plus radiation therapy treatment arm and 44 patients received poor medical condition of the patient (n Å 1). Five of 12 
chemotherapy alone. There were 12 major protocol viola-patients received only a portion of the proscribed treatment; 
tions, including 7 patients who were randomized (6 to che-one patient, randomized to chemotherapy, withdrew after 
motherapy plus radiation therapy and 1 patient to chemother-experiencing an allergic bleomycin reaction during the initial 
apy alone) and then either refused treatment (n Å6) or were infusion of bleomycin during cycle 1. Four patients randomized to chemotherapy plus radiation refused either the radia-to follow-up or had no follow-up data available for analysis. 
tion therapy (n Å3) or had a major violation in the radiation Thus, there were 33 patients who received the combination 
therapy treatment plan when intravaginal radiation therapy of chemotherapy and pelvic radiation and 39 who received 
was administered, and she did not receive the last 2 cycles chemotherapy alone who could be evaluated for disease-
of cisplatin (n Å1). free and overall survival. Overall survival and disease-free 
Among the 77 patients evaluable for response, 5 were lost survival curves are presented in Fig. 1. At a median follow
up of 36 months (range 4ñ81 months), 19 patients have planned dose when treatment was stopped due to a severe 
histologic documentation of recurrent cervical cancer. There skin reaction. One patient developed radiation proctitis re-
has been no significant difference in disease-free survival quiring a colostomy after completion of the prescribed dose 
between the two treatment groups (Fig. 2); 10 patients in of pelvic radiation therapy. 
the chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation therapy arm have 
experienced recurrences compared to 9 recurrences in the DISCUSSION 
group of patients treated with chemotherapy alone. Among 
patients with 3 or more risk factors, there was also no differ-The debate regarding the role of adjuvant therapy for paence in the disease-free survival or overall survival when tients at high risk for recurrence after radical hysterectomy 
compared to patients with 1ñ2 risk factors (Fig. 3). Patterns for an early-stage cervical cancer has generally focused on 
of recurrence did not appear to be significantly different, as whether radiation therapy alone is beneficial in reducing 
presented in Table 2. recurrence rates. Radiation therapy alone probably reduces 

Toxicity was tolerable in the two treatment arms. Most the incidence of local and regional recurrences but does 
acute toxicity was generally of a minor level related to antici-not affect the overall survival. Monk and colleagues 
pated toxicity of cisplatin and bleomycin. Major toxicity suggest that a 65% 5-year survival rate after therapy combinincluded one patient who did not receive the second cycle ing radical hysterectomy, pelvic lymphadenectomy, and 
of bleomycin due to the onset of pulmonary symptoms and postoperative pelvic radiotherapy for patients with pelvic 
a significant decrease in pulmonary function compared to a lymph node metastases is an improvement compared to his-
pretreatment study. One patient had the fourth cycle of cis-torical controls. However, many patients who have these 
platin held due to persistent grade 3 neutrophil toxicity risk factors are at an increased risk for early, subclinical 
(grade 3 Å neutrophil count . 1000 cells/mm3). Two pa-dissemination of disease which will not be affected by radiatients experienced significant toxicity secondary to the pelvic tion therapy directed to the pelvis. The rationale for adding 
radiation therapy; 1 patient received 3780 cGy of 4500 cGy chemotherapy to the pelvic radiation is to provide systemic 
cytotoxic agents active against cervical cancer with the potential to eradicate micrometastasis. In the Memorial Hospital pilot trial of the combination of chemotherapy plus pelvic 
radiation, there was a promising improvement in outcome 
when compared to historical controls who had received pelvic radiation alone. Killackey et al. reported no 
recurrences among 22 patients with cervical cancer at high 
risk after radical hysterectomy utilizing a similar treatment 
regimen consisting of chemotherapy plus pelvic radiation 
therapy. Tattersall et al. were unable to demonstrate a 
difference in disease-free or overall survival in 71 patients 
randomized to either pelvic radiation versus chemotherapy 
plus pelvic radiation after radical hysterectomy for Stage 
IBñIIA cervical cancer. 

The rate or recurrences among all the patients in the trial 
validates the selection of the entry criteria as high-risk factors. The risk factors did not appear to be additive, since the 
disease-free and overall survival were similar when patients 
with 1ñ2 risk factors were compared to those patients with 
3 or more risk factors. Twelve of the 19 recurrences were 
either local recurrences only or local plus distant metastases, 
with no difference in the number of local occurrences between the two treatment arms. This finding is somewhat 
surprising since there was no apparent effect of the addition 
of pelvic radiation to the treatment regimen. 

The closure of this clinical trial prior to completion of 
the accrual goal was disappointing. The initial statistical 
prediction was that in order to show a 20% improvement in 
survival of one treatment over the other, 80 patients were 
needed in each treatment arm. The analysis of the data from 
the 89 patients entered is not able to document that the two 
treatments are equivalent, but must be taken to suggest that 
the likelihood of finding a significant difference between 
these two treatment modalities in a full trial of 160 patients 
is small. The investigators hope that future cooperative group 
trials will consider a chemotherapy-only treatment arm in 
any studies addressing the role of adjuvant therapy after 
radical hysterectomy for patients at high risk for recurrence. 
The advantages of eliminating the radiation therapy component of postoperative therapy are apparent in that the duration of treatment is shorter, costs are reduced, and the long-
term side effects of pelvic radiotherapy after radical pelvic 
surgery are eliminated. Additionally, if the patient does experience a local or regional recurrence after chemotherapy, 
pelvic radiation therapy still has curative potential. Investigators who design adjuvant trials for patients at high risk for 
recurrence after radical hysterectomy for invasive cervical 
cancer must balance the potential benefit to be gained by a 
minority of patients against the risks inherent in treating all 
patients. 
