

RESULTS of several studies, including findings from two recent randomized trials have demonstrated
that long-term survival of  early-stage breast cancer patients receiving conservative treatment was
not significantly different than for those receiving  a mastectomy. However, except for the study by
Wolberg et al, the methods used in these comparative analyses were relatively weak. For example,
several of the studies  reported using samples that were self-selected and small, the studies of
Schain et al"2 and Steinberg et all's used retrospective self-report, without controlling for the
time since treatment. Our research group, first at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and  now at
the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, has been following two samples of early-stage
breast cancer patients,  a proportion of each having received breast-sparing procedures. As the
National Surgical Adjuvant Breast  and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-06 trial had ended 4 months before
patients started being accrued to this present study, patients  "elected" (ie, were not randomized,
but "negotiated" in some sense) their treatment modality. 


Approximately half of the NCI sample received  excisional biopsy (a reflection of the randomization
procedure used in that trial), whereas a larger proportion of the  Pittsburgh stage I and II breast
cancer sample elected excisional biopsy. 


The assessment schedule for the two study sites was identical, and the test battery was similar for
both the Pittsburgh and  NCI samples. As detailed in our earlier publications,"2 in addition to a
structured interview being conducted approximately  five days postsurgery, all patients were
assessed using the Profile of Mood States (POMS), 21 and were rated by independent  observers for
their disability status using the Karnofsky rating scale. We expanded our measurement of perceived
social support and coping styles used by patients because of our earlier  NCI findings, and because
of other research suggesting that such factors play an important role in both adjustment and host 
status during distress. This scale allows the quantification of  perceived emotional support from a
variety of others, including spouse (or intimate other), family members, and friends.  


Using repeated measures two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) tests,26 we analyzed differences in
psychological distress  and functional status, stratifying by type of surgery (excisional biopsy v
mastectomy) and time of measurement (baseline v  3-month follow-up). However, we did make direct
comparisons between the two samples at baseline,  using t tests to examine distress differences
between identical baseline surgical treatments. For both samples, menopausal  status and
chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were co-varied at follow-up. Specifically, for the
Pittsburgh sample, in  addition to menopausal status, number of radiotherapy treatments (ranging
from 0 to nth treatment at follow-up) and type ofchemotherapy categorized according to toxicity of
side effects (0 = none, 1 = tamoxifen alone, 2 = multimodality  chemotherapy) were co-varied in all
ANVOCA analyses. For the  Pittsburgh sample, we examined emotional distress scores (POMS total and
subscores), physical disability, and perceived  social support factors as dependent variables. 
Anxiety tended to decrease over time for all patients, although less so for  the excisional biopsy
patients (F = 3.5, P < .06), and fatigue tended to increase over the 3-month follow-up period, again
 with excisional biopsy patients reporting higher average levels of fatigue than mastectomy patients
(F = 6.5, P < .01).  


Table 3 displays means, standard errors, and the main effect and interaction results for the repeat
measures ANOVA for the NCI sample. When comparing surgery groups, trends occurred for fatigue  and
depression, with mastectomy patients reporting more depression and fatigue overall than excisional
biopsy patients.  


As there were no significant differences in disease status, age, or educational  levels, one major
difference at this point was the experience of being randomized to surgical treatment or not. 
However, for patients who received an excisional biopsy, the patients at the Pittsburgh site were
significantly more  depressed (t = 3.4, P < .001) and angry (t = 2.1, P < .04), and had overall
significantly higher total distress scores (t =  2.0, P < .04) at baseline than patients at the NCI
research site. 


First, when early-stage breast cancer patients have  some choice regarding extent of surgery, with
the potential option of "sparing" the compromised breast, emotional distress in  general increases,
at least in the short run (in this case, over a 3-month follow-up period). 


As discussed  earlier, given the proportion of patients in the sample receiving a mastectomy,
approximately 30%, it is highly likely based  on other literature'" that most of the mastectomy
patients did not receive breast-sparing treatment for medical, rather than  psychological reasons. 
However, despite this unknown, if there were any biological advantage in the data, it would have 
favored the lumpectomy patients. 


Although  there were no significant biological or demographic differences between the Pittsburgh and
NCI samples, the women who  participated in the trial knew that they would be randomized within an
experimental context, and may have been attracted to such a process for a variety of reasons,
including the possible desire not to make a treatment choice. 


Future studies, analyzing patients' perceptions of the need for treatment as a  contributor to
distress sequelae, might shed light in this regard. Having made the above qualifications withrespect
to unknowns, ie, pretreatment personality and actual suitability for excisional biopsy, as well as
the limits of  self-report, one implication that could be drawn here is that to make a treatment
choice within a risky context of perceived unknowns is threat-producing. 


Whatever the basis of the breastsparing choice ("narcissism," "escape," "appropriate self-interest,"
and  so on), it may well be the case that the woman is not prepared for the scarring and the
physical monitoring that follow. 
