Although no prospective follow-up was reported for these patients, there was a clear assumption that the lumpectomy patients were psychologically better off, both pre- and postsurgery. Our research group, first at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and now at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, has been following two samples of early-stage breast cancer patients, a proportion of each having received breast-sparing procedures. At Pittsburgh, approximately 100 stage I and II patients, recruited primarily from the practices of four university-based surgeons, have been enrolled in a prospective study, examining behavioral and immunological predictors of time to recurrence of disease. As the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-06 trial had ended 4 months before patients started being accrued to this present study,patients "elected" (ie, were not randomized, but "negotiated" in some sense) their treatment modality. These are the patients who will be reported on here. There were no differences between the two samples in terms of age, educational status,or racial composition. A somewhat higher, but nonsignificant proportion of the sample at Pittsburgh had at least some positive axillary lymph nodes. Approximately half of the NCI sample received excisional biopsy (a reflection of the randomization procedure used in that trial), whereas a larger proportionof the Pittsburgh stage I and II breast cancer sample elected excisional biopsy. Based on previous data,"6 approximately two thirds ofstage I and II patients may be eligible for conservative treatment. 

Patients with centrally located tumors, multifocalor bilateral tumors, or patients who have previously undergone contralateral mastectomy are typically ineligible forbreast-sparing surgery. Given that approximately 70% of the Pittsburgh sample actually received an excisional biopsy plusradiation, it is apparent that most, if not all, of the patients offered a breast-sparing technique accepted this option. Thus, treatment plans for the Pittsburgh sample were not made by a process of randomization,but by a clinical decision process involving discussion between physician and patient. The assessment schedule for the two study sites was identical, and the test battery was similar for both thePittsburgh and NCI samples.  Test-retest reliability over a 3-month period for subscales ranged from r = .5 (perceived support from afamily member) to r = .62 (perceived support from a spouse).

RESULTS
Using repeated measures two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) tests,26 we analyzed differencesin psychological distress and functional status, stratifying by type of surgery (excisionalbiopsy v mastectomy) and time of measurement(baseline v 3-month follow-up). For both samples, menopausal status and chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were co-varied at follow-up. Anxiety tended to decrease over time for all patients, although less so for the excisional biopsy patients (F = 3.5, P < .06), and fatigue tended to increase over the 3-month follow-up period, again with excisional biopsypatients reporting higher average levels offatigue than mastectomy patients (F = 6.5, P <.01). Again, it should be kept in mind that we co-varied chemotherapy and radiotherapy dosing. In every case, the excisional biopsy group emerged as the most distressed overall, compared with the mastectomy group. Specifically, they reported higher symptoms of confusion (F = 5.8, P < .02), more anger(F = 10.2, P < .003), and more depression (F =9.2, P < .005) than the mastectomy group, andhad higher overall total distress scores (F = 5.5,P < .02). Again, although there were no significant interactions between surgery group and time on these mood factors, an examination ofthe subgroup means showed that the excisional biopsy patients tended to look more "stressed" ordysphoric over the 3-month follow-up period. In addition to controlling for the effects of therapy in these data, we also compared patients in terms of disability ratings. However, there were also significant main effects by surgery group, with the excisional biopsy group reporting overall less social support from afriend (F = 4.4, P < .04) and from people ingeneral over the follow-up period (F = 7.5,P < .01). In fact, there was a group x time interaction on this latter variable, with biopsy patients reporting a significant decrease in emotional support from people in general over the3-month follow-up period compared with mastectomypatients (F = 5.4, P < .02). However, the report of anger (F = 8.5, P < .005), confusion (F = 6.2,P < .01), and fatigue (F = 35.8, P < .0001) increased over time. As there were no significant differences in disease status, age,or educational levels, one major difference at this point was the experience of being randomized to surgical treatment or not. As can be seen, there were no significant differences between mastectomy patients at thetwo research sites on distress scores. Thus, again, differential emotional distress scores may more likely be attributable to the significance of the treatment choice within the immediate healthcare context,rather than to differences in treatment technology or extent of disease at baseline.

DISCUSSION
There are at least three conclusions that can be drawn from these data. Have you felt isolatedfrom others? Because these studies were not planned withthese comparisons in mind, there clearly are some unknowns in the data. First, in the Pittsburgh sample, we do not know what proportion ofearly-stage breast cancer patients who received a mastectomy could have chosen a lumpectomy ifthey had preferred the latter breast-sparing technique. Excisional biopsy, plus radiation, is not appropriate for all early-stage patients (fo rexample, those with a relatively large, centrally located lesion). However,despite this unknown, if there were any biological advantage in the data, it would have favored thelumpectomy patients. In contrast, women in the community did have to consider options. A hint regarding stable personality characteristics in the Pittsburgh sample was reflected in the coping strategy endorsed by these women. Caution needs to be raised in terms of data interpretation and methodological limits inherent in this study. First, emotional distress symptoms that were reported were not of psychopathological severity. If narcissism plays any role, such women may be particularly vulnerable to distress faced with the postsurgery reality of cosmetic compromise. Finally, educational implications can be drawn from these data regarding the erosion of social support coincident with higher distress levels in the excisional biopsy group. Although perhaps the assumption has been that this group needs less support than the woman who has had a mastectomy, these data would suggest that this may not be the case. We believe that the verdict is not in. What we are suggesting is that this option is not a panacea. 
