RESULTS of several studies, including findings from two recent randomized trials have demonstrated that long-term survival of  early-stage breast cancer patients receiving conservative treatment was not significantly different than for those receiving  a mastectomy. There have been several studies over the years examining  breast cancer patients' psychological adjustment to medical treatment. However, only six studies have been directly concerned with the comparative analysis of psychological status between patients treated with mastectomy v excisional biopsy plus  radiation. Wolberg et al studied a sample of early-stage breast cancer patients who were eligible for breast-sparing technology, and examined psychological and demographic factors  that differentiated those who chose a "lumpectomy," from those who elected mastectomy. Our research group, first at the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and  now at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, has been following two samples of early-stage breast cancer patients,  a proportion of each having received breast-sparing procedures. At the time that these data  were examined, approximately 50 patients had completed 3-month follow-up assessment. Patients
Table 1 displays demographic, stage, and treatment characteristics of the two samples. Approximately half of the NCI sample received  excisional biopsy (a reflection of the randomization procedure used in that trial), whereas a larger proportion of the  Pittsburgh stage I and II breast cancer sample elected excisional biopsy. We use the term  "elected" here to denote the nonrandomized treatment experience of the patients in the Pittsburgh sample. Patients with  centrally located tumors, multifocal or bilateral tumors, or patients who have previously undergone contralateral mastectomy  are typically ineligible for breast-sparing surgery. Procedures Baseline. 
The Pittsburgh sample was also re-assessed, using the Michigan  Perceived Social Support Questionnaire.

RESULTS
Using repeated measures two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) tests,26 we analyzed differences in psychological distress  and functional status, stratifying by type of surgery (excisional biopsy v mastectomy) and time of measurement (baseline v  3-month follow-up). For both samples, menopausal  status and chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were co-varied at follow-up. Specifically, for the Pittsburgh sample, in  addition to menopausal status, number of radiotherapy treatments (ranging from 0 to nth treatment at follow-up) and type of
For the  Pittsburgh sample, we examined emotional distress scores (POMS total and subscores), physical disability, and perceived  social support factors as dependent variables. There was no overall surgery group x time interaction for the emotional distress measures. Anxiety tended to decrease over time for all patients, although less so for  the excisional biopsy patients (F = 3.5, P < .06); and fatigue tended to increase over the 3-month follow-up period, again  with excisional biopsy patients reporting higher average levels of fatigue than mastectomy patients (F = 6.5, P < .01).  When considering main effects for the  surgery group stratification, four univariate tests were statistically significant. In every case, the excisional biopsy  group emerged as the most distressed overall, compared with the mastectomy group. As shown in  Table 2, mastectomy patients had an overall higher Karnofsky rating, but there was no significant interaction between  surgical groups over time. It is somewhat puzzling that mastectomy patients were rated functionally higher postsurgery than patients receiving an excisional biopsy. Interestingly, coincident with the biopsy patients reporting either greater distress in general, or increasing distress over time, they also reported significantly less social support from family and friends than the  mastectomy patient group. First, in terms of overall significance of the group x time  comparison for the distress variables, there was only a significant overall multivariate F value for time when analyzing the distress scores (F = 43.6, P < .0001). When comparing surgery groups, trends occurred for fatigue  and depression, with mastectomy patients reporting more depression and fatigue overall than excisional biopsy patients.  Although mastectomy patients were significantly more depressed at baseline testing than the excisional biopsy  patients, over time the latter group became strikingly more depressed in comparison with the mastectomy group.

Finally, Table 4 shows means, standard deviations, and t tests, comparing the NCI and Pittsburgh sample directly on baseline  distress symptoms, stratified by treatment group. That is, groups with identical surgical treatment (excisional biopsy plus  axillary dissection or mastectomy) were compared within 1 week of surgery, before receiving any additional therapy. As can be  seen, there were no significant differences between mastectomy patients at the two research sites on distress scores.  However, for patients who received an excisional biopsy, the patients at the Pittsburgh site were significantly more  depressed (t = 3.4, P < .001) and angry (t = 2.1, P < .04), and had overall significantly higher total distress scores (t =  2.0, P < .04) at baseline than patients at the NCI research site. Second,  coincident with overall higher levels of emotional distress in patients opting for an excisional biopsy is a decrease in  emotional support from significant others in the biopsy patients' environment. Third, within the context of a randomized treatment trial, emotional distress sequelae  increased over time, irrespective of treatment modality. First, in  the Pittsburgh sample, we do not know what proportion of early-stage breast cancer patients who received a mastectomy could  have chosen a lumpectomy if they had preferred the latter breast-sparing technique. As discussed  earlier, given the proportion of patients in the sample receiving a mastectomy, approximately 30%, it is highly likely based  on other literature'" that most of the mastectomy patients did not receive breast-sparing treatment for medical, rather than  psychological reasons. On reflection, this pattern of higher reported distress in the excisional biopsy group is not surprising. The patient, particularly in the early  aftermath of surgical treatment, is examined and monitored closely. Such patients undergoing radiation therapy are reminded  nearly daily of their need for treatment. Overall, it may not be that surprising that this group of  patients may be particularly vulnerable to anxiety and distress postsurgery. Perhaps  more simply accomplished is educating the patient regarding the clinical aftermath of breast-sparing surgery. Finally, educational implications can be drawn from these data regarding the erosion of social support  coincident with higher distress levels in the excisional biopsy group. Spouses, family members, and others can be encouraged to meet the emotional distress needs of these patients. patients undergoing conservative treatment. 

