RESULTS of several studies, including findings from two recent randomized trials have demonstrated that long-term survival of early-stage breast cancer patients receiving conservative treatment was not significantly different than for those receiving a mastectomy. Despite the biological significance of these findings, ie, that breast cancer is inherently a systemic disease, the assumption has been that for the patient, these results are good news. That is, the patient is assumed to be psychologically better off receiving a breast-sparing treatment. However, only six studies have been directly concerned with the comparative analysis of psychological status between patients treated with mastectomy v excisional biopsy plus radiation. Although no prospective follow-up was reported for these patients, there was a clear assumption that the lumpectomy patients were psychologically better off, both pre- and postsurgery. All patients who are node-positive also receive a course of adjuvant chemotherapy. As the National Surgical Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP) B-06 trial had ended 4 months before patients started being accrued to this present study, patients "elected" (ie, were not randomized, but "negotiated" in some sense) their treatment modality. At the time that these data were examined, approximately 50 patients had completed 3-month follow-up assessment. These are the patients who will be reported on here. We use the term "elected" here to denote the nonrandomized treatment experience of the patients in the Pittsburgh sample. Patients with centrally located tumors, multifocal or bilateral tumors, or patients who have previously undergone contralateral mastectomy are typically ineligible for breast-sparing surgery. The Pittsburgh sample was also re-assessed, using the Michigan Perceived Social Support Questionnaire. For both samples, menopausal status and chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were co-varied at follow-up. There was no overall surgery group x time interaction for the emotional distress measures. Anxiety tended to decrease over time for all patients, although less so for the excisional biopsy patients (F = 3.5, P < .06); and fatigue tended to increase over the 3-month follow-up period, again with excisional biopsy patients reporting higher average levels of fatigue than mastectomy patients (F = 6.5, P < .01). In every case, the excisional biopsy group emerged as the most distressed overall, compared with the mastectomy group. Again, although there were no significant interactions between surgery group and time on these mood factors, an examination of the subgroup means showed that the excisional biopsy patients tended to look more "stressed" or dysphoric over the 3-month follow-up period.In addition to controlling for the effects of therapy in these data, we also compared patients in terms of disability ratings. As shown in Table 2, mastectomy patients had an overall higher Karnofsky rating, but there was no significant interaction between surgical groups over time. It is somewhat puzzling that mastectomy patients were rated functionally higher postsurgery than patients receiving an excisional biopsy. Interestingly, coincident with the biopsy patients reporting either greater distress in general, or increasing distress over time, they also reported significantly less social support from family and friends than the mastectomy patient group. In fact, there was a group x time interaction on this latter variable, with biopsy patients reporting a significant decrease in emotional support from people in general over the 3-month follow-up period compared with mastectomy patients (F = 5.4, P < .02). When comparing surgery groups, trends occurred for fatigue and depression, with mastectomy patients reporting more depression and fatigue overall than excisional biopsy patients. Although mastectomy patients were significantly more depressed at baseline testing than the excisional biopsy patients, over time the latter group became strikingly more depressed in comparison with the mastectomy group. As can be seen, there were no significant differences between mastectomy patients at the two research sites on distress scores. First, when early-stage breast cancer patients have some choice regarding extent of surgery, with the potential option of "sparing" the compromised breast, emotional distress in general increases, at least in the short run (in this case, over a 3-month follow-up period). Second, coincident with overall higher levels of emotional distress in patients opting for an excisional biopsy is a decrease in emotional support from significant others in the biopsy patients' environment. As discussed earlier, given the proportion of patients in the sample receiving a mastectomy, approximately 30%, it is highly likely based on other literature'" that most of the mastectomy patients did not receive breast-sparing treatment for medical, rather than psychological reasons. Those receiving a biopsy compared with mastectomy patients tended to report that they coped by using escape fantasies in dealing with life's difficulties. Further, if there are not significant differences between early-stage breast cancer patients in Wisconsin and those in Pennsylvania, then the findings of Wolberg et a1'6 may generalize to our Pittsburgh population. On reflection, this pattern of higher reported distress in the excisional biopsy group is not surprising. The patient, particularly in the early aftermath of surgical treatment, is examined and monitored closely. Such patients undergoing radiation therapy are reminded nearly daily of their need for treatment. 
