

RESULTS of several studies, including findings from two recent randomized trials have demonstrated
that long-term survival of  early-stage breast cancer patients receiving conservative treatment was
not significantly different than for those receiving  a mastectomy. There have been several studies
over the years examining  breast cancer patients' psychological adjustment to medical treatment. 
However, except for the study by Wolberg et al, the methods used in these comparative analyses were
relatively weak. For example, several of the studies  reported using samples that were self-selected
and small, the studies of Schain et al"2 and Steinberg et all's used retrospective self-report,
without controlling for the time since treatment. Our research group, first at the National Cancer
Institute (NCI) and  now at the University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, has been following two
samples of early-stage breast cancer patients,  a proportion of each having received breast-sparing
procedures. At Pittsburgh, approximately 100 stage I and II patients,  recruited primarily from the
practices of four university-based surgeons, have been enrolled in a prospective study,  examining
behavioral and immunological predictors of time to recurrence of disease. These two prospective
studies were not initiated in order to examine psychological sequelae of  breast-sparing surgery v
mastectomy. 


The relatively larger proportion of Pittsburgh  patients receiving breast conservation surgery may
also reflect the fact that the NSABP Headquarters is in Pittsburgh, and  the popularity of
excisional biopsy has been greatly influenced by the NSABP experience in that city. It is also
probably safe to assume for this sample that there was a discussion of treatment options  with their
surgeon, as well as a clinical rule-out for procedures that were deemed inappropriate for the
individual case.  


The assessment schedule for the two study sites was identical, and the test battery was similar for
both the Pittsburgh and  NCI samples. As detailed in our earlier publications,"2 in addition to a
structured interview being conducted approximately  five days postsurgery, all patients were
assessed using the Profile of Mood States (POMS), 21 and were rated by independent  observers for
their disability status using the Karnofsky rating scale. 


Using repeated measures two-way analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) tests,26 we analyzed differences in
psychological distress  and functional status, stratifying by type of surgery (excisional biopsy v
mastectomy) and time of measurement (baseline v  3-month follow-up). However, we did make direct
comparisons between the two samples at baseline,  using t tests to examine distress differences
between identical baseline surgical treatments. For both samples, menopausal  status and
chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were co-varied at follow-up. Specifically, for the
Pittsburgh sample, in  addition to menopausal status, number of radiotherapy treatments (ranging
from 0 to nth treatment at follow-up) and type ofchemotherapy categorized according to toxicity of
side effects (0 = none, 1 = tamoxifen alone, 2 = multimodality  chemotherapy) were co-varied in all
ANVOCA analyses. First, in order to control for potentially inflated F values for repeated 
nivariate tests using the six subscales and total score of the POMS, we performed a multivariate
analysis of covariance (MANCOVA) on this measure, testing for overall significant main effects and
interactions using the POMS scale. Specifically, they reported higher symptoms of confusion (F =
5.8, P < .02), more anger (F = 10.2, P < .003), and more depression (F = 9.2, P < .005) than the
mastectomy  group, and had higher overall total distress scores (F = 5.5, P < .02). Thus, the
differences in  distress scores at follow-up were not likely a function of number of radiotherapy
treatments, toxicity of chemotherapy, or  physical disability status. In fact, there was a group  x
time interaction on this latter variable, with biopsy patients reporting a significant decrease in
emotional support from  people in general over the 3-month follow-up period compared with mastectomy
patients (F = 5.4, P < .02). 


Table 3 displays means, standard errors, and the main effect and interaction results for the repeat
measures ANOVA for the NCI sample. When comparing surgery groups, trends occurred for fatigue  and
depression, with mastectomy patients reporting more depression and fatigue overall than excisional
biopsy patients.  


(Means are slightly different from means shown in Tables 2 and 3 due to differential numbers of
patients entering the repeated  measures ANOVAs and t test comparisons.) 


First, in  the Pittsburgh sample, we do not know what proportion of early-stage breast cancer
patients who received a mastectomy could  have chosen a lumpectomy if they had preferred the latter
breast-sparing technique. 


In the layperson's view,  lumpectomy may still be an experimental treatment, and the patient lives
everyday with the subjective experience of possibly  still harboring malignancy in the spared
breast. 


Nevertheless, we may not be doing a good job translating journal reports for patient comprehension
and consumption. Whatever the basis of the breastsparing choice ("narcissism," "escape,"
"appropriate self-interest," and  so on), it may well be the case that the woman is not prepared for
the scarring and the physical monitoring that follow. Given the results of the recent trials, she is
not biologically better off, as there appears to be no biological  advantage favoring one surgery
over another. 
