 MTX has been widely used as a single agent for treatment of head and neck cancer, while 5-FU is a major drug for treatment of advanced colorectal and gastric cancer.  Subsequent treatment was dependent on the primary site and on prior treatment, but was defined by the protocol to be radiotherapy after completion of protocol chemotherapy in previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer. Among previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer, disease stage expressed as TNM separately and as stage grouping, using standard definitions of the American Joint Committee for Cancer Staging and- End Result reporting were also examined as possible prognostic factors for response and survival. Four patients, two on each treatment sequence, died of treatment-related complications (sepsis in two patients, diarrhea in one, and aspiration pneumonia in one patient), and a further patient developed prolonged neurologic toxicity with coma but recovered fully. Both treatment sequences were effective in head and neck cancer, producing an overall major response rate (complete and partial) of 46% of all entered patients, including 52% (95% confidence limits, 39%-65%) of evaluable patients. This was most extreme among previously untreated patients with head and neck cancer: of this subgroup 65% responded to the sequence of MF, while 39% of entered patients including 47% of those evaluable for response, responded to the reverse FM sequence (P = .18; Patients with head and neck cancer had significantly longer survival than those with other primary sites (P < .001), reflecting the relatively earlier stage at which chemotherapy was used in head and neck cancer.  Cox model multivariate analysis showed that ECOG performance status at study entry was the most significant prognostic factor for survival duration (P < .001), and that, among the 70 patients with head and neck cancer, when allowance was made for performance status, a survival difference in favor of the "reverse" FM sequence emerged (P < .025).  Among patients with colorectal cancer, responses were seen in 33% of all entered patients, including 40% (95% confidence limit, 19%- 64%) of those evaluable for response. Because the question at issue was the sequence of drug administration rather than the study of a particular tumor type, we chose to include patients with SCCs of the head and neck, colorectal or gastric adenocarcinoma, and other SCCs reasonably treated by either MTX or 5-FU. In the small number of patients with colorectal cancer we observed a response rate of 33% (40% of evaluable patients), a figure somewhat higher than that usually seen after 5-FU as a single agent, but the 95% confidence limits for this rate (19%-64%) emphasize that this could be a chance observation.
