RESULTS of several studies, including
findings from two recent randomized
trials have demonstrated that long-term survival
of early-stage breast cancer patients receiving
conservative treatment was not significantly
different than for those receiving a mastectomy.
Despite the biological significance of these findings,
ie, that breast cancer is inherently a systemic
disease, the assumption has been that for
the patient, these results are good news. That is,
the patient is assumed to be psychologically
better off receiving a breast-sparing treatment.
There have been several studies over the years
examining breast cancer patients' psychological
adjustment to medical treatment. However,
only six studies have been directly concerned
with the comparative analysis of psychological
status between patients treated with mastectomy
v excisional biopsy plus radiation. Taken
together, the results from these latter projects
suggest either no difference in outcome as a
result of surgical treatment, or where a difference
in outcome was found, the findings were
clearly in favor of the women who received a
breast-sparing procedure. (An exception to this
trend was reported by Fallowfield et a1 and their findings will be discussed later in conjunction
with findings from our current research
reported here.) However, except for the study by
Wolberg et al, the methods used in these comparative
analyses were relatively weak. For
example, several of the studies reported using
samples that were self-selected and small; the
studies of Schain et al"2 and Steinberg et all's used
retrospective self-report, without controlling for
the time since treatment.
Wolberg et al studied a sample of early-stage
breast cancer patients who were eligible for breast-sparing technology, and examined psychological
and demographic factors that differentiated
those who chose a "lumpectomy," from
those who elected mastectomy. These researchers
found that those who chose mastectomy were
more anxious and depressed, while those who
chose a breast-sparing procedure placed significantly
more value on their physical appearance.
These assessments were made before any surgery
was actually performed. Although no prospective
follow-up was reported for these patients, there
was a clear assumption that the lumpectomy
patients were psychologically better off, both
pre- and postsurgery.
Our research group, first at the National
Cancer Institute (NCI) and now at the University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, has been
following two samples of early-stage breast cancer
patients, a proportion of each having received
breast-sparing procedures. At the NCI, approximately
93 women who are participating in a
randomized trial (NCI protocol 79-C-111) testing
the efficacy of excisional biopsy plus radiotherapy
v mastectomy are being followed prospectively.
All patients who are node-positive
also receive a course of adjuvant chemotherapy.
(Complete details of treatment schedule and
dose-intensity have been published.)
At Pittsburgh, approximately 100 stage I and
II patients, recruited primarily from the practices
of four university-based surgeons, have been
enrolled in a prospective study, examining behavioral
and immunological predictors of time to
recurrence of disease. As the National Surgical
Adjuvant Breast and Bowel Project (NSABP)
B-06 trial had ended 4 months before patients
started being accrued to this present study,
patients "elected" (ie, were not randomized, but
"negotiated" in some sense) their treatment
modality. At the time that these data were
examined, approximately 50 patients had completed
3-month follow-up assessment. These are
the patients who will be reported on here.
These two prospective studies were not initiated
in order to examine psychological sequelae
of breast-sparing surgery v mastectomy. But the
two samples offered an opportunity, prospectively
to examine baseline (approximately five
days postsurgery) and 3-month follow-up data on
women who were randomized to treatment on the
one hand, v those who exercised some choice in
the treatment decision on the other. MATERIALS AND METHODS
Patients
Table 1 displays demographic, stage, and treatment characteristics
of the two samples. There were no differences
between the two samples in terms of age, educational status,
or racial composition. A somewhat higher, but nonsignificant
proportion of the sample at Pittsburgh had at least some
positive axillary lymph nodes. Approximately half of the NCI
sample received excisional biopsy (a reflection of the randomization
procedure used in that trial), whereas a larger proportion
of the Pittsburgh stage I and II breast cancer sample
elected excisional biopsy. The relatively larger proportion of
Pittsburgh patients receiving breast conservation surgery
may also reflect the fact that the NSABP Headquarters is in
Pittsburgh, and the popularity of excisional biopsy has been
greatly influenced by the NSABP experience in that city.
We use the term "elected" here to denote the nonrandomized
treatment experience of the patients in the Pittsburgh
sample. Based on previous data,"6 approximately two thirds of
stage I and II patients may be eligible for conservative
treatment. Patients with centrally located tumors, multifocal
or bilateral tumors, or patients who have previously undergone
contralateral mastectomy are typically ineligible for
breast-sparing surgery. Given that approximately 70% of the
Pittsburgh sample actually received an excisional biopsy plus
radiation, it is apparent that most, if not all, of the patients
offered a breast-sparing technique accepted this option. It is
also probably safe to assume for this sample that there was a
discussion of treatment options with their surgeon, as well as
a clinical rule-out for procedures that were deemed inappropriate
for the individual case. Thus, treatment plans for the
Pittsburgh sample were not made by a process of randomization,
but by a clinical decision process involving discussion
between physician and patient.
Procedures
Baseline. The assessment schedule for the two study sites
was identical, and the test battery was similar for both the
Pittsburgh and NCI samples. As detailed in our earlier
publications,"2 in addition to a structured interview being
conducted approximately five days postsurgery, all patients
were assessed using the Profile of Mood States (POMS), 21
and were rated by independent observers for their disability
status using the Karnofsky rating scale.22 Scores on this latter
scale range in deciles, reflecting functional status (eg, 100 -
fully functional and active; 60 = needs assistance in daily
activities; 20 - bedridden).
We expanded our measurement of perceived social support
and coping styles used by patients because of our earlier NCI
findings, and because of other research suggesting that such factors play an important role in both adjustment and host
status during distress. Thus, we measured in a more
detailed and methodologically sophisticated way the character
of perceived social support in this sample, using a selfreport
instrument that was developed at the University of
Michigan specifically to measure the quality of social support
in breast cancer populations. This scale allows the quantification
of perceived emotional support from a variety of others,
including spouse (or intimate other), family members, and
friends. Test-retest reliability over a 3-month period for
subscales ranged from r = .5 (perceived support from a
family member) to r = .62 (perceived support from a spouse).
Inter-item correlations (Cronbach's alpha coefficient) for
items associated with each category of social other were all
highly significant (eg, r - .95 for perceived support from a
spouse).
Three-month follow-up. At 3 months postsurgery, all
patients were seen as outpatients, were administered the
POMS, and were rated again on their psychological and
physical adjustment to the illness. The Pittsburgh sample was
also re-assessed, using the Michigan Perceived Social Support
Questionnaire.
RESULTS
Using repeated measures two-way analysis of
covariance (ANCOVA) tests,26 we analyzed differences
in psychological distress and functional
status, stratifying by type of surgery (excisional
biopsy v mastectomy) and time of measurement
(baseline v 3-month follow-up). Because of the
inherent methodological differences between the
two samples, one attached to a randomized trial
and the other not, we did not use study site as a
third factor, but initially carried out separate
statistical analyses on the two samples for comparison
purposes. However, we did make direct
comparisons between the two samples at baseline,
using t tests to examine distress differences
between identical baseline surgical treatments.
For both samples, menopausal status and
chemotherapy and radiotherapy treatment were
co-varied at follow-up. Specifically, for the Pittsburgh
sample, in addition to menopausal status,
number of radiotherapy treatments (ranging
from 0 to nth treatment at follow-up) and type of
chemotherapy categorized according to toxicity
of side effects (0 = none, 1 = tamoxifen alone,
2 = multimodality chemotherapy) were co-varied
in all ANVOCA analyses. For the NCI
sample, a somewhat simpler co-varying scheme
was used. As stipulated by protocol NCI-C-111,
if patients had any nodes positive, they were
rated as receiving chemotherapy on follow-up
(virtually all patients receiving the same regimen),
and their scores were coded accordingly (1 = chemotherapy, 0 = none). Similarly, if they
had received an excisional biopsy, they were
rated as also receiving radiotherapy postsurgery,
and scores were also appropriately coded to
reflect receiving that type of treatment on followup
(1 = radiotherapy, 0 = none).
For the Pittsburgh sample, we examined emotional
distress scores (POMS total and subscores),
physical disability, and perceived social
support factors as dependent variables. First, in
order to control for potentially inflated F values
for repeated univariate tests using the six subscales
and total score of the POMS, we performed
a multivariate analysis of covariance
(MANCOVA) on this measure, testing for overall
significant main effects and interactions using
the POMS scale. We found a significant overall
main effect for the surgery group (F = 2.7,
P < .03), as well as a significant overall main
effect for time (F = 4.3, P < .003). There was no
overall surgery group x time interaction for the
emotional distress measures.
Table 2 displays means, standard errors, and
the main effect and interaction results for the
repeated measures ANOVA. Although the overall
main effect of time was significant, only two
of the univariate emotional distress variables
were significantly different over time for the
sample as a whole. Anxiety tended to decrease
over time for all patients, although less so for the
excisional biopsy patients (F = 3.5, P < .06); and
fatigue tended to increase over the 3-month
follow-up period, again with excisional biopsy
patients reporting higher average levels of
fatigue than mastectomy patients (F = 6.5, P <
.01). Again, it should be kept in mind that we
co-varied chemotherapy and radiotherapy dosing.
Thus, the increase in fatigue symptoms are
likely a reflection of psychological, rather than
just physical status.
When considering main effects for the surgery
group stratification, four univariate tests were
statistically significant. In every case, the excisional
biopsy group emerged as the most distressed
overall, compared with the mastectomy
group. Specifically, they reported higher symptoms
of confusion (F = 5.8, P < .02), more anger
(F = 10.2, P < .003), and more depression (F =
9.2, P < .005) than the mastectomy group, and
had higher overall total distress scores (F = 5.5,
P < .02). Again, although there were no significant
interactions between surgery group and time on these mood factors, an examination of
the subgroup means showed that the excisional
biopsy patients tended to look more "stressed" or
dysphoric over the 3-month follow-up period.
In addition to controlling for the effects of
therapy in these data, we also compared patients
in terms of disability ratings. As shown in Table
2, mastectomy patients had an overall higher Karnofsky rating, but there was no significant
interaction between surgical groups over time. It
is somewhat puzzling that mastectomy patients
were rated functionally higher postsurgery than
patients receiving an excisional biopsy. However,
this main effect for surgery group was only
marginally significant (P < .05). The differences
in mean values for the two groups were in fact clinically insignificant in terms of functional
ratings. At 3 month's follow-up, the surgery
groups were identical in terms of overall disability
ratings. Thus, the differences in distress
scores at follow-up were not likely a function of
number of radiotherapy treatments, toxicity of
chemotherapy, or physical disability status.
Interestingly, coincident with the biopsy
patients reporting either greater distress in general,
or increasing distress over time, they also
reported significantly less social support from
family and friends than the mastectomy patient
group. Specifically, everyone in general reported
less social support over time from a family member
(F = 10.3, P < .003), from a friend (F = 6.9,
P < .01), and from a spouse (F = 5.3, P < .02).
However, there were also significant main effects
by surgery group, with the excisional biopsy
group reporting overall less social support from a
friend (F = 4.4, P < .04) and from people in
general over the follow-up period (F = 7.5,
P < .01). In fact, there was a group x time
interaction on this latter variable, with biopsy
patients reporting a significant decrease in emotional support from people in general over the
3-month follow-up period compared with mastectomy
patients (F = 5.4, P < .02).
Turning to the NCI sample, because this was
an earlier study and we had not yet refined our
behavioral measures, we could only compare the
two surgery groups over time on the emotional
distress measures. In general, the pattern of
findings was strikingly distinct from those
reported above. Table 3 displays means, standard
errors, and the main effect and interaction
results for the repeat measures ANOVA for the
NCI sample.
First, in terms of overall significance of the
group x time comparison for the distress variables,
there was only a significant overall multivariate
F value for time when analyzing the
distress scores (F = 43.6, P < .0001). Specifically,
the overall distress score decreased over time
.(F = 17.4, P < .0001), as did the report of vigor
(F = 43.8, P < .0001). However, the report of
anger (F = 8.5, P < .005), confusion (F = 6.2,
P < .01), and fatigue (F = 35.8, P < .0001)
increased over time. When comparing surgery groups, trends occurred for fatigue and depression,
with mastectomy patients reporting more
depression and fatigue overall than excisional
biopsy patients. Again, as with the Pittsburgh
sample and as described earlier, we adjusted
group means in order to control for the effects of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Thus, report of
these distress symptoms is interpreted here as
being primarily psychological, rather than physical
in nature.
As shown in Table 3, there was a significant
group x time interaction for depression (F = 5.2,
P < .02). Although mastectomy patients were
significantly more depressed at baseline testing
than the excisional biopsy patients, over time the
latter group became strikingly more depressed in
comparison with the mastectomy group.
Finally, Table 4 shows means, standard deviations,
and t tests, comparing the NCI and Pittsburgh
sample directly on baseline distress symptoms,
stratified by treatment group. That is,
groups with identical surgical treatment (excisional
biopsy plus axillary dissection or mastectomy)
were compared within 1 week of surgery,
before receiving any additional therapy. (Means
are slightly different from means shown in
Tables 2 and 3 due to differential numbers of
patients entering the repeated measures ANOVAs and t test comparisons.) As there were
no significant differences in disease status, age,
or educational levels, one major difference at this
point was the experience of being randomized to
surgical treatment or not.
As can be seen, there were no significant
differences between mastectomy patients at the
two research sites on distress scores. However,
for patients who received an excisional biopsy,
the patients at the Pittsburgh site were significantly
more depressed (t = 3.4, P < .001) and
angry (t = 2.1, P < .04), and had overall
significantly higher total distress scores (t = 2.0,
P < .04) at baseline than patients at the NCI
research site. As can also be seen, there were no
significant differences in axillary nodal status or
delay time to diagnosis for either surgery group
between research sites. Thus, again, differential
emotional distress scores may more likely be
attributable to the significance of the treatment
choice within the immediate healthcare context,
rather than to differences in treatment technology
or extent of disease at baseline.
DISCUSSION
There are at least three conclusions that can be
drawn from these data. First, when early-stage breast cancer patients have some choice regarding
extent of surgery, with the potential option of
"sparing" the compromised breast, emotional
distress in general increases, at least in the short
run (in this case, over a 3-month follow-up
period). This distress does not appear to be
attributable to disability status, subsequent adjuvant
treatment, or extent of the early-stage disease.
Second, coincident with overall higher levels of
emotional distress in patients opting for an excisional
biopsy is a decrease in emotional support
from significant others in the biopsy patients'
environment. Examples of items on this social
support measure are the following: "In the last
month, did you feel that the people in your life let
you down by not showing you as much love and
concern as you would like? Have you felt isolated
from others? Have you felt irritated or resentful
toward people in your personal life?"
Third, within the context of a randomized
treatment trial, emotional distress sequelae
increased over time, irrespective of treatment
modality. Surgical group differences appeared to
be more subtle, with depression increasing over
the follow-up period for those assigned to excisional
biopsy.
Because these studies were not planned with
these comparisons in mind, there clearly are
some unknowns in the data. First, in the Pittsburgh
sample, we do not know what proportion of
early-stage breast cancer patients who received a
mastectomy could have chosen a lumpectomy if
they had preferred the latter breast-sparing technique.
Excisional biopsy, plus radiation, is not
appropriate for all early-stage patients (for
example, those with a relatively large, centrally
located lesion). As discussed earlier, given the
proportion of patients in the sample receiving a
mastectomy, approximately 30%, it is highly
likely based on other literature'" that most of the
mastectomy patients did not receive breast-sparing
treatment for medical, rather than psychological
reasons. Viewed another way, it appears
that most, if not all those who had the choice,
opted for a breast-sparing procedure. However,
despite this unknown, if there were any biological
advantage in the data, it would have favored the
lumpectomy patients. But the psychological pattern
that emerged was exactly the opposite. Those most biologically advantaged as a group
appeared to be more distressed, or to increase in
distress over time.
Another unknown is the psychological comparability
of the Pittsburgh and NCI samples.
Although the issue has not been systematically
studied, it may be the case that patients who are
treated at the NCI and/or who agree to participate
in randomized trials are not representative
of patients in general, and at least psychologically
are a distinct group. Although there were
no significant biological or demographic differences
between the Pittsburgh and NCI samples,
the women who participated in the trial knew
that they would be randomized within an experimental
context, and may have been attracted to
such a process for a variety of reasons, including
the possible desire not to make a treatment
choice. In contrast, women in the community did
have to consider options. And when surgery was
an excisional biopsy, rather than mastectomy,
such choice was at least correlated with more
distress. Again, as shown in Table 4, there were
no significant baseline differences in psychological
factors between the randomized and community
sample when the choice was a mastectomy.
An additional unknown in these data is the
personality makeup of the samples before surgical
choice was considered. A hint regarding
stable personality characteristics in the Pittsburgh
sample was reflected in the coping strategy
endorsed by these women. Those receiving a
biopsy compared with mastectomy patients
tended to report that they coped by using escape
fantasies in dealing with life's difficulties. Of
course, they reported using other coping strategies
also, but this was the coping strategy that
significantly differentiated the two treatment
groups. Further, if there are not significant differences
between early-stage breast cancer
patients in Wisconsin and those in Pennsylvania,
then the findings of Wolberg et a1'6 may generalize
to our Pittsburgh population. That is, perhaps
"narcissistic" concern over body image also plays
a role in treatment choice. We will return to this
latter possibility when discussing educational
implications.
Caution needs to be raised in terms of data
interpretation and methodological limits inherent
in this study. First, emotional distress symptoms that were reported were not of psychopathological
severity. These were psychiatrically
normal women who reported varying degrees of
emotional disturbance. Here we presented within
group comparisons, and in that context, we
believe the findings are noteworthy. Second,
these data are predominantly self-report, albeit
self-report on validated and reliable test instruments.
It is the pattern of self-report symptoms that
we believe are potentially clinically significant.
On reflection, this pattern of higher reported
distress in the excisional biopsy group is not
surprising. The treated breast frequently
remains difficult to monitor due to surgical
sequelae such as scarring. The patient, particularly
in the early aftermath of surgical treatment,
is examined and monitored closely. Such
patients undergoing radiation therapy are
reminded nearly daily of their need for treatment.
Future studies, analyzing patients' perceptions
of the need for treatment as a contributor to
distress sequelae, might shed light in this regard.
Overall, it may not be that surprising that this
group of patients may be particularly vulnerable
to anxiety and distress postsurgery.
Having made the above qualifications with
respect to unknowns, ie, pretreatment personality
and actual suitability for excisional biopsy, as
well as the limits of self-report, one implication
that could be drawn here is that to make a
treatment choice within a risky context of perceived
unknowns is threat-producing. Rodin et
a127 suggested that perhaps choice and control
are only positively motivating for an individual
"when he or she has enough information to
evaluate the alternatives effectively." In the layperson's
view, lumpectomy may still be an experimental
treatment, and the patient lives everyday
with the subjective experience of possibly still
harboring malignancy in the spared breast. The
concern, and even anxiety, of her physicians may
be subtly conveyed to the patient, reinforcing her
fears.
Several intervention implications can be
drawn from these findings. First, women (and
their families) need to be educated about the
biological significance of the recent trials, that
there truly appears to be no survival advantage
using more radical surgeries. There is always the difficulty of conveying individual risk on the
basis of population statistics. Nevertheless, we
may not be doing a good job translating journal
reports for patient comprehension and consumption.
Perhaps more simply accomplished is educating
the patient regarding the clinical aftermath
of breast-sparing surgery. Very few women are
"good as new." Whatever the basis of the breastsparing
choice ("narcissism," "escape," "appropriate
self-interest," and so on), it may well be
the case that the woman is not prepared for the
scarring and the physical monitoring that follow.
If narcissism plays any role, such women may be
particularly vulnerable to distress faced with the
postsurgery reality of cosmetic compromise.
Finally, educational implications can be
drawn from these data regarding the erosion of
social support coincident with higher distress
levels in the excisional biopsy group. Spouses,
family members, and others can be encouraged
to meet the emotional distress needs of these
patients. Although perhaps the assumption has
been that this group needs less support than the
woman who has had a mastectomy, these data
would suggest that this may not be the case. In
fact, these women may be at particular mental
health risk, at least in the short run. One could
argue that even short-term mental health needs,
if unmet, cause unnecessary suffering that perhaps
could be alleviated by support interventions
and the like. However, complementary to our
short-term findings, there is evidence that such
psychological discomfort may in fact continue in
patients undergoing conservative treatment. A
recent article by Fallowfield et a117 reported
longer-term follow-up data for comparable
women in Great Britain who had had a lumpectomy.
They concluded that the level of distress
among women treated with lumpectomy and
radiation "was a disappointing finding, but one
which cannot be ignored. These women clearly
need just as much counseling support as patients
who undergo mastectomy."
Now that the woman has a choice, is she better
off? Given the results of the recent trials, she is
not biologically better off, as there appears to be
no biological advantage favoring one surgery
over another. Is she cosmetically better off? In
some cases she is. But psychologically is she better off? We believe that the verdict is not in.
But based on the data reported here, as well as
the results reported from the British study, we
may have to question our assumptions in this
regard.
In conclusion, we are not suggesting that a woman should not opt for a breast-sparing technique.
What we are suggesting is that this option
is not a panacea. Health care professionals
should recognize the special needs that may
remain in this group of patients.
