In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers, local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers, whether treated by surgery or irradiation. We elected to test this combination in a phase 3 trial to determine whether concurrent weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy would improve progression-free survival and survival in women with large “bulky,” or barrel-shaped, stage IB cervical cancers.

Patients
Patients with histologic evidence of lymph-node involvement
Radiotherapy
The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both groups. Hysterectomy
The primary end points were progression-free survival and survival. RESULTS
Characteristics of the Patients
Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13 patients (7 percent) assigned to radiotherapy alone and 14 patients (8 percent) assigned to radiotherapy and cisplatin. There was a slightly higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31 percent in the radiotherapy group). Four patients assigned to the cisplatin regimen (2 percent) received no cisplatin. A total of 164 patients (90 percent) received four or more courses of cisplatin. One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone and two patients assigned to receive radiotherapy
and cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy. The median total treatment time was 50 days in both groups (Table 2).

Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent) in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin. More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. five in the combined-therapy group), and more patients in this group also had an early recurrence (eight vs. two). There were significantly more hysterectomy specimens without detectable cancer in the combined-therapy group than in the group given radiotherapy alone (52 percent vs. 41 percent, P=0.04).

Adverse Effects
There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone. These reactions consisted almost exclusively of transient hematologic effects (39 and 3 patients in the respective groups) and gastrointestinal effects (26 and 9 patients) (Table 3). Progression-free Survival
The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table 4). The relative risk of recurrence in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.51 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.75).

Survival
Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent), as compared with 27 of the patients in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table 4). The relative risk of death in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.54 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.86). The threeyear survival rates were 74 percent in the group given radiotherapy alone and 83 percent in the combined-therapy group (P=0.008 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 2). This controversy stimulated an earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomy after radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone (unpublished data). Weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy has been assessed in several phase 2 studies. In that study, the combination of concurrent radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy was superior to treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy. The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, whose results appear elsewhere in this issue of the Journal, compared pelvic and para-aortic radiotherapy with pelvic radiotherapy in  combination with cisplatin and fluorouracil in patients with clinical stage IB through IVA cervical cancer. The Southwest Oncology Group study compared pelvic radiotherapy alone with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with fluorouracil and cisplatin in high-risk patients  with involvement of lymph nodes or surgical margins who had undergone radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer stage IA2, IB, or IIA (unpublished data). 

