THE American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics define stage IB cervical cancer as invasive cancer that is confined to the cervix with a depth of more than 5 mm and a width of more than 7 mm. In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers whether treated by surgery or irradiation. The optimal treatment of large stage IB cervical cancer has been a source of controversy since the late 1960s. In a previous randomized trial of combined external and intracavitary irradiation alone or followed by extrafascial hysterectomy the Gynecologic Oncology Group found that hysterectomy did not improve survival but it did significantly reduce the rate of relapse in the pelvic region unpublished data. METHODS. Patients. Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell carcinoma adenocarcinoma or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix of stage IB exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors with a minimal diameter of 4 cm were eligible for the study. In addition patients could have no radiographic evidence of lymphadenopathy on computed tomographic scanning or lymphangiography and in those with enlarged or suspicious-appearing lymph nodes no evidence of cancer on fine-needle aspiration or histologic evaluation. Extraperitoneal surgical staging of lymph nodes was optional. Written informed consent was obtained before entry into the study fulfilling all institutional state and federal regulations. Treatment with cisplatin was withheld if the total white-cell count fell below 3000 per cubic millimeter or if creatinine clearance fell below 50 ml per minute. The Radiological Physics Center in Houston coordinated the reviews of radiotherapy. Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement the treatment assignments were stratified according to center and to whether para-aortic lymph nodes were evaluated surgically with approximately equal numbers of patients assigned to each group. Life-table estimates were calculated according to the method of Kaplan and Meier. The difference between groups in survival and progression-free survival was evaluated with use of the logrank test according to the intention-to-treat principle. The Cox model was used to evaluate the difference between treatment regimens adjust for prognostic factors and estimate the relative likelihood and 95 percent confidence intervals of survival and progression-free survival. Differences between groups in the severity of adverse effects and the frequency of hysterectomy specimens that were negative for cancer were evaluated with use of Pearsons chi-square test. Two scheduled interim analyses were conducted during the enrollment phase of the trial: the first was conducted after 29 recurrences had been reported and the second after 47 recurrences had been reported. Characteristics of the Patients. From February 1992 to April 1997 a total of 374 women were enrolled in the study at 48 Gynecologic Oncology Group institutions. An additional patient was also excluded because she had received radiotherapy before entry. Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13 patients 7 percent assigned to radiotherapy alone and 14 patients 8 percent assigned to radiotherapy and cisplatin. Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients 90 percent in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients 96 percent in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin. One patient who received cisplatin died after an automobile accident she had no evidence of cancer at her last examination. The numbers of patients who were alive at the time of this analysis but in whom disease had recurred were 20 and 11 respectively. The treatment of women with bulky stage IB cervical cancers has historically been only partially satisfactory with survival rates of 70 to 75 percent substantially below the rates of 88 to 92 percent expected with smaller stage IB cancers. The use of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy has gradually been abandoned but there has continued to be disagreement about the value of the operation. The results of a subsequent trial involving similar patients are reported by Rose et al. in this issue of the Journal. It is reasonable to conclude on the basis of these results and our results that the elimination of hysterectomy from both regimens would not have affected the increase in survival associated with the use of cisplatin. 
