<DOC>
  <DOCNO>1108</DOCNO>
  <TEXT>
THE American Joint Committee on Cancer and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics define stage IB cervical cancer as invasive cancer that is confined to the cervix, with a depth of more than 5 mm and a width of more than 7 mm. In patients with large stage IB cervical cancers, local control and survival are poorer than in patients with smaller stage I cancers, whether treated by surgery or irradiation.  *eos The optimal treatment of large stage IB cervical cancer has been a source of controversy since the late 1960s. *eos 

In a previous randomized trial of combined external and intracavitary irradiation alone or followed by extrafascial hysterectomy, the Gynecologic Oncology Group found that hysterectomy did not improve survival, but it did significantly reduce the rate of relapse in the pelvic region (unpublished data).  *eos Several phase 2 studies have reported that concomitant treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy results in faster and more complete responses and better survival than expected with radiotherapy alone. *eos 

We elected to test this combination in a phase 3 trial to determine whether concurrent weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy would improve progression-free survival and survival in women with large “bulky,” or barrel-shaped, stage IB cervical cancers. *eos 

METHODS. *eos Patients. *eos Women of any age with biopsy-proved primary squamous-cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma, or adenosquamous carcinoma of the cervix of stage IB (exophytic or expansile barrel-shaped tumors with a minimal diameter of 4 cm) were eligible for the study.  *eos Inaddition, patients could have no radiographic evidence of lymphadenopathy on computed tomographic scanning or lymphangiography, and in those with enlarged or suspicious-appearing lymph nodes, no evidence of cancer on fine-needle aspiration or histologic evaluation.  *eos Extraperitoneal surgical staging of lymph nodes was optional.  *eos Patients with histologic evidence of lymph-node involvementwere not eligible, nor were those who had previously received radiotherapy or chemotherapy or those with a history of cancer other than nonmelanoma skin cancer.  *eos 

All patients were required to have a Gynecologic Oncology Group performance status of 0, 1, 2, or 3 (equivalent to Karnofsky performance scores of 90 or 100, 70 or 80, 50 or 60, and 30 or 40, respectively) and adequate bone marrow, renal function, and hepatic function.  *eos Patients were excluded from the study if they were thought to be unable to complete the planned course of therapy or the follow-up evaluations.  *eos In addition, patients had to be medically suitable for hysterectomy.  *eos The institutions that participated in the study are listed in the Appendix.  *eos Written informed consent was obtained before entry into the study, fulfilling all institutional, state, and federal regulations. *eos 

Radiotherapy. *eos All patients were scheduled to undergo external irradiation, intracavitary brachytherapy, and extrafascial hysterectomy, with half the patients randomly assigned to receive weekly intravenous infusions of cisplatin during the period of radiotherapy.  *eos The prescribed regimen of radiotherapy was identical in both groups.  *eos Pelvic radiation was delivered with the four-field technique with x-ray accelerators of at least 4-MV photons at a distance of at least 100 cm. The treatment field was set to extend 3 cm beyond the known extent of disease and to encompass iliac and lower common iliac lymph nodes.  *eos Fractions of 1.8 to 2.0 Gy were delivered 5 days a week over a period of 4 1/2 to 5 weeks, for a total dose of 45 Gy.  *eos External irradiation was withheld if the white-cell count fell below 1000 per cubic millimeter and was resumed once the count rose above that level.  *eos Low-dose brachytherapy was performed in one or two intracavitary applications after the completion of pelvic radiotherapy.  *eos Standard Fletcher–Suit or Henschke applicators were used.  *eos The dose to point A (a reference location 2 cm lateral and 2 cm superior to the cervical os) was 30 Gy, for a cumulative dose of 75 Gy, and the cumulative dose to point B (the pelvic wall) was 55 Gy. *eos 

Chemotherapy. *eos Cisplatin was given intravenously once a week at a dose of 40 mg per square meter of body-surface area, with the total dose not to exceed 70 mg per week.  *eos A maximum of six doses of cisplatin was given.  *eos The final dose could be given during a patient’s hospitalization for intracavitary brachytherapy.  *eos Treatment with cisplatin was withheld if the total white-cell count fell below 3000 per cubic millimeter or if creatinine clearance fell below 50 ml per minute. *eos 

Hysterectomy. *eos Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed three to six weeks after the completion of radiotherapy.  *eos The corpus and cervix were removed but not contiguous parametrial tissue.  *eos The uterine vessels were transected at the uterine wall medial to the ureters, which were not unroofed.  *eos No vaginal cuff was removed.  *eos 

Quality Control and Follow-up. *eos Patients’ medical records, films, and pathology slides were reviewed by the appropriate Gynecologic Oncology Group committees.  *eos The Radiological Physics Center in Houston coordinated the reviews of radiotherapy.  *eos Patients were evaluated every three months for the first two years and then semiannually for three additional years.  *eos Adverse effects were reported in accordance with the Gynecologic Oncology Group criteria. *eos 

Outcome. *eos The primary end points were progression-free survival and survival.  *eos Progression-free survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of disease recurrence, death, or the last follow-up visit.  *eos Survival was calculated from the date of entry into the study to the date of death or the last follow-up visit.  *eos Recurrences were classified as local if they were detected in the pelvis, cervix, or vagina and as distant if they were detected in extrapelvic locations.  *eos The hysterectomy specimens were evaluated for evidence of cancer. *eos 

Statistical Analysis. *eos We estimated that 173 patients were needed in each treatment group in order to be able to detect a 40 percent decrease in the recurrence rate in the group given radiotherapy and chemotherapy.  *eos The design called for a final analysis when 56 events (recurrences or deaths) had occurred in patients receiving the control regimen (radiotherapy alone) and provided the study with a statistical power of 80 percent with use of the log-rank test and a one-sided significance level of 0.05. *eos 

At the time of this analysis, 69 patients in the group receiving the control regimen had had a recurrence of disease and 49 had died — 88 percent of the number of deaths needed for a final analysis of survival.  *eos Therefore, because of the large difference in outcome between the two groups and the similarity in the rates of progression-free survival and survival within each group, this analysis is the final analysis of survival. *eos 

Randomization was carried out by a block arrangement, the treatment assignments were stratified according to center and to whether para-aortic lymph nodes were evaluated surgically, with approximately equal numbers of patients assigned to each group.  *eos Life-table estimates were calculated according to the method of Kaplan and Meier. *eos 

The difference between groups in survival and progression-free survival was evaluated with use of the logrank test according to the intention-to-treat principle.  *eos The Cox model was used to evaluate the difference between treatment regimens, adjust for prognostic factors, and estimate the relative likelihood (and 95 percent confidence intervals) of survival and progression-free survival.  *eos Differences between groups in the severity of adverse effects and the frequency of hysterectomy specimens that were negative for cancer were evaluated with use of Pearson’s chi-square test.  *eos All reported P values are two-tailed.  *eos Two scheduled interim analyses were conducted during the enrollment phase of the trial, the first was conducted after 29 recurrences had been reported, and the second after 47 recurrences had been reported.  *eos The first stopping rule was chosen to reject the null hypothesis at the 1 percent level, whereas the second was chosen so that the level of rejection for both interim tests was 2 percent.  *eos This interim testing increased the value of the type I error from the conventional 5 percent to 6 percent.  *eos To simplify presentation, the P values were not adjusted for the results of the two interim analyses. *eos 

RESULTS. *eos Characteristics of the Patients. *eos From February 1992 to April 1997, a total of 374 women were enrolled in the study at 48 Gynecologic Oncology Group institutions.  *eos Four were subsequently excluded after a central review by the pathology committee found that the specimen was inadequate for evaluation in the case of one patient,the primary lesion had been misidentified in the case of one patient, the cell type had been misidentified in the case of one patient, and the stage of the tumor had been overestimated in the case of one patient.  *eos An additional patient was also excluded because she had received radiotherapy before entry.  *eos Three of these patients had been randomly assigned to receive radiotherapy alone, and two had been assigned to receive radiotherapy and concomitant treatment with cisplatin.  *eos Thus, a total of 369 patients were evaluated, 186 in the radiotherapy group and 183 in the combined-therapy group. *eos 

Pretreatment surgical evaluation of para-aortic lymph nodes was optional and was performed in 13 patients (7 percent) assigned to radiotherapy alone and 14 patients (8 percent) assigned to radiotherapy and cisplatin.  *eos There were no significant differences in demographic or tumor characteristics between the two groups (Table 1).  *eos All patients had primary cervical cancers that were at least 4 cm in diameter, and the distribution of the tumors according to size was similar in the two groups.  *eos There was a slightly higher percentage of patients with grade 3 tumors in the combined-therapy group (38 percent, vs. 31 percent in the radiotherapy group).  *eos Four patients assigned to the cisplatin regimen (2 percent) received no cisplatin.  *eos A total of 164 patients (90 percent) received four or more courses of cisplatin.  *eos The median weekly dose of cisplatin was 39.0 mg per square meter (10th and 90th percentiles, 32.3 and 40.3, respectively, range, 0 to 49.7).  *eos One patient assigned to receive radiotherapy alone and two patients assigned to receive radiotherapyand cisplatin refused to undergo radiotherapy.  *eos Otherwise, compliance with radiotherapy with respect to the dose, the volume, and the total treatment was good and was similar between the two groups (Table 2).  *eos The median total treatment time was 50 days in both groups (Table 2). *eos 

Extrafascial hysterectomy was performed after radiotherapy in 168 patients (90 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone and 175 patients (96 percent) in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin.  *eos More patients in the group given radiotherapy alone refused to undergo the operation (nine, vs. five in the combined-therapy group), and more patients in this group also had an early recurrence (eight vs. two).  *eos There were significantly more hysterectomy specimens without detectable cancer in the combined-therapy group than in the group given radiotherapy alone (52 percent vs. 41 percent, P=0.04). *eos 

Adverse Effects. *eos There were no treatment-related deaths, but 64 patients (35 percent) in the combined-therapy group had grade 3 (moderate) or grade 4 (severe) adverse effects, as compared with 25 patients (13 percent) in the group given radiotherapy alone.  *eos These reactions consisted almost exclusively of transient hematologic effects (39 and 3 patients in the respective groups) and gastrointestinal effects (26 and 9 patients) (Table 3).  *eos Grade 3 hematologic toxicity was defined as a total white-cell count of less than 2000 per cubic millimeter, and grade 4 as a total white-cell count of less than 1000 per cubic millimeter.  *eos Grade 3 gastrointestinal toxicity was defined as intractable vomiting despite treatment with antiemetic drugs that ultimately required hospitalization, and grade 4 as dehydration, gastrointestinal bleeding, or both.  *eos Very few patients required surgical intervention for obstruction or formation of a fistula, and these patients were equally divided between the two groups.  *eos The frequency of grade 1 (minimal) and grade 2 (mild) genitourinary and neurologic adverse effects was higher in the combined-therapy group. *eos 

Progression-free Survival. *eos The disease recurred in 69 patients in the group given radiotherapy alone (37 percent) and 38 patients given radiotherapy and cisplatin (21 percent) (Table 4).  *eos This difference predominantly reflects the fact that there were fewer local recurrences in the combined-therapy group (16, vs. 39 in the radiotherapy group).  *eos At the time of this analysis, the rate of progression-free survival was significantly higher among patients in the combined-therapy group (P<0.001 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 1).  *eos The relative risk of recurrence in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.51 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.75). *eos 

Survival. *eos The median duration of follow-up was 36 months.  *eos Forty-nine of the patients in the group given radiotherapy alone died of cervical cancer (26 percent), as compared with 27 of the patients in the group given radiotherapy and cisplatin (15 percent) (Table 4).  *eos One patient who received cisplatin died after an automobile accident, she had no evidence of cancer at her last examination.  *eos The relative risk of death in the combined-therapy group as compared with the group given radiotherapy alone was 0.54 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.34 to 0.86).  *eos The threeyear survival rates were 74 percent in the group given radiotherapy alone and 83 percent in the combined-therapy group (P=0.008 by the log-rank test) (Fig. 2).  *eos The numbers of patients who were alive at the time of this analysis but in whom disease had recurred were 20 and 11, respectively. *eos 

Prognostic Factors. *eos Cox multiple regression analysis showed that the size of the tumor as assessed by physical examination and the histologic grade of the tumor were both significant prognostic factors.  *eos Adjustment for these factors had no significant effect on the differences between the groups in survival and progression-free survival.   *eos 

DISCUSSION. *eos The treatment of women with bulky stage IB cervical cancers has historically been only partially satisfactory, with survival rates of 70 to 75 percent, substantially below the rates of 88 to 92 percent expected with smaller stage IB cancers.  *eos The recognition, in some centers, that patients with bulky stage  IB cancers had higher rates of recurrent disease within the cervical area led to the inclusion of adjuvant extrafascial hysterectomy in the treatment regimen for these women.  *eos This approach was, however, associated with considerable morbidity.  *eos The use of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy has gradually been abandoned, but there has continued to be disagreement about the value of the operation. *eos 

This controversy stimulated an earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group trial in which patients were randomly assigned to undergo either hysterectomy after radiotherapy or radiotherapy alone (unpublished data).  *eos In 1992, when the current study was initiated, complete data on survival in the earlier trial were not available, but an early analysis showed a significantly lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region among women who underwent hysterectomy.  *eos Therefore, we chose to test the value of concurrent treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy followed by hysterectomy as compared with that of radiotherapy alone followed by hysterectomy. *eos 

Like others, we found that the size of the tumor was an important prognostic factor.  *eos All our patients had cervical cancers of at least 4 cm in diameter, and the distribution of the tumors according to size was similar in the two treatment groups.  *eos The role of chemotherapy in the treatment of locally advanced cervical cancers has been uncertain.  *eos Various drugs have been used in clinical trials and  increasingly in clinical practice in the past 15 years.  *eos The possibility that these drugs may have additive effects, regardless of the mechanism, when given concurrently with radiotherapy has been the subject of study.  *eos Cisplatin potentiates the sublethal damageinduced by radiation and inhibits the repair of potentially lethal radiation-induced damage. *eos 

Weekly treatment with cisplatin during radiotherapy has been assessed in several phase 2 studies.  *eos The promising results of these studies as well as the fact that this combination is well tolerated and easy to administer on an outpatient basis led us to evaluate it in this trial. *eos 

Both cisplatin and fluorouracil are active against cancer of the cervix in patients with recurrent disease.   *eos The effect of these two drugs in combination with radiotherapy was compared with the effect of hydroxyurea and radiotherapy in a randomized phase 3 trial by the Gynecologic Oncology Group involving patients with cervical cancer of stages IIB through IVA (unpublished data).  *eos In that study, the combination of concurrent radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy was superior to treatment with hydroxyurea and radiotherapy.  *eos The results of a subsequent trial involving similar patients are reported by Rose et al. in this issue of the Journal.  *eos They compared treatment with radiation and hydroxyurea, treatment with radiation and weekly cisplatin, and treatment with radiation and hydroxyurea, cisplatin, and fluorouracil and found that the rate of relapse-free survival was significantly higher in both regimens containing cisplatin.  *eos In addition to these three trials, two other randomized trials have also found that combining radiotherapy and cisplatin-containing chemotherapy improves survival and disease-free survival.  *eos The Radiation Therapy Oncology Group study, whose results appear elsewhere in this issue of the Journal, compared pelvic and para-aortic radiotherapy with pelvic radiotherapy in  combination with cisplatin and fluorouracil in patients with clinical stage IB through IVA cervical cancer.  *eos The Southwest Oncology Group study compared pelvic radiotherapy alone with pelvic radiotherapy in combination with fluorouracil and cisplatin in high-risk patients  with involvement of lymph nodes or surgical margins who had undergone radical hysterectomy for cervical cancer stage IA2, IB, or IIA (unpublished data).  *eos Both studies found that survival was increased by the use of radiotherapy in combination with cisplatin containing chemotherapy. *eos 

In our trial the only difference in the protocols for the two groups was the use of weekly infusions of cisplatin during radiotherapy for bulky stage IB cervical cancers.  *eos The risk of recurrence and death was significantly reduced by concurrent treatment with cisplatinand radiotherapy.  *eos This difference appeared to be due to the lower rate of relapses in the pelvic region in the combined-therapy group.  *eos Although this regimen was also associated with higher rates of adverse effects, these effects consisted predominantly of transient hematologic and gastrointestinal effects, with no evidence of an increase in other serious effects.  *eos There was no evidence of a difference in the frequencies of late adverse effects between the groups.  *eos Of the 369 eligible patients in our study who were scheduled to undergo hysterectomy after the completion of radiotherapy, 93 percent did undergo the surgery.  *eos We believe that the value of hysterectomy in these patients is doubtful.  *eos In the earlier Gynecologic Oncology Group study that assessed the value of extrafascial hysterectomy after radiotherapy, surgery was associated with a significant reduction in the rate of relapses in the pelvic region, but the overall risk of recurrence was not significantly reduced (relative risk, 0.76, 95 percent confidence interval, 0.52 to 1.12) and there was no significant difference in survival (relative risk of death, 0.91).  *eos It is reasonable to conclude on the basis of these results and our results that the elimination of hysterectomy from both regimens would not have affected the increase in survival associated with the use of cisplatin.  *eos Therefore, radiotherapy in combination with treatment with cisplatin should be adequate for patients with bulky stage IB cervical cancer. *eos 

The five randomized trials of cervical cancer that we have discussed involve different stages of cervical cancer and combinations of treatment, but they share a common result, all five studies found that concomitant treatment with cisplatin and radiotherapy led to better outcomes than radiotherapy alone or in combination with treatments that did not include cisplatin.  *eos This remarkable consistency offers a compelling reason to consider cisplatin therapy in combination with radiotherapy as a new standard of care for patients with bulky stage IB, stage IIB through IVA, and high-risk cervical cancers. *eos 

  </TEXT>
</DOC>
