

Patients and Methods, A total of 189 patients with resected Dukes' C colorectal cancer were randomly
allocated to infusions of a total of 900 mg 17-1A antibody, 500 mg postoperatively followed by 4
monthly doses of 100 mg (n = 99), or to observation only (n = 90). Primary end points were overall
survival and disease-free interval. After 7 years of follow-up evaluation, treatment had reduced
overall mortality by 32% (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .01, log-rank, P = .01) and decreased the
recurrence rate by 23% (Cox's proportional hazard, P < .04, log-rank, P = .07). This differential
effect of 17-1A antibody on disseminated isolated tumor cells versus occult local satellites may
explain the increased significance seen in the overall survival. 


The multicenter study consisted of six academic centers in former West Germany A total of 189
patients were randomized, with the first patient entered in May 1985 and the last in Apnl 1990 The
study was closed in December 1992, and we present here the final status with median follow-up data
of 7 years Eligible patients were required to have histologically confirmed adenocarcmoma of colon
or the rectum with spread to regional lymph nodes (Dukes' C or International Unimon Agamst Cancer
[UICC] stage III) In addition, hlstopathologic confirmation of curative resection (R0) was secured
Radical tumor resection was performed by a standardized technique agreed upon by all participating
centers When located within 15 cm of the anal verge, a tumor was classified as rectal carcinoma
Patients were less than 70 years old and had a Karnofsky index greater than 50% Eleven of 99
patients randomized to treatment refused their treatment assignment, but were otherwise considered
eligible for the study. 


All patients were stratified according to Zelen 8 by the following factors participating center,
sex, location of tumor, stage (Dukes' Cl or C2 equivalent to pN1 or pN2-3), number of affected lymph
nodes, and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) level before surgery (Table 1) In the treated arm, more
patients had pT2 and pT3 tumors, and fewer had pT4 tumors However, treated patients appeared to have
had higher numbers of involved lymph nodes (pN2) and tumors of less differentiated histology (grade
3). However, a Fishers' exact test, companng the distnbutlon of patients according to all prognostic
variables, showed no significant differences Randomlzation before consent was performed and
evaluated according to Zelen 9 On approval by legal experts in 1985, this procedure was accepted by
the ethical review board Statistical analyses were performed according to SAS (Statistical Analysis
System, Cary, NC) To test for potential selection bias in the study, a retrospective analysis was
performed at Medizimnische Hochschule Hannover on 67 Dukes' C colorectal cancer patients selected
from 107 patients seen between 1980 and 1985 They fulfilled the entry criteria for the 17-1A
clinical trial and were monitored for at least 5 years each The survival analysis was performed by
the Instutut fur Medlzinische Informatlk und Blomathematlk, Umversltat Essen The overall survival
according to Kaplan-Meier curve is nearly identical to the control group of the 17-1A trial
(log-rank, P = 97), thus, this historical control does not show any selection bias.


The study performance and protocol adherence was overseen by the trial's blometncal center located
at the University of Essen. 


A documented histologic or radiologic diagnosis of disease was  required to confirm local or distant
recurrence, whereas abnormal CEA values were not used as evidence of relapse. 


The main cause of ineligibihty (12 cases) was erroneous staging. Thus, eight patients had Dukes' B,
four had Dukes' D, three were older than 70 years, one presented with polyposis coh, and one patient
had residual tumor (R2) after surgery. One patient had a competing neoplasm and one patient received
postoperative radiochemotherapy. 


Since the 5-year follow-up evaluation, four additional deaths occurred m the treated group and nine
additional deaths in the control group. Among all deaths recorded, six patients died without
recurrence or secondary colorectal cancer and one observed patient of the control group died of
secondary colon carcinoma, which was not counted as a recurrence. When cancer-related mortality was
assessed, ie, death without recurrence was not counted as event, the benefit of treatment remained
significant at P < .01 by Cox's multivariate analysis and P = .01 by log-rank test for the
univariate analysis. 


The reduction in recurrence was 23% (hazards ratio, 0.66, 95% confidence interval, 1% to 43%)
Recurrence-free intervals were plotted according to Kaplan-Maier (Fig 2). When the analyses of
recurrence-free interval and recurrence-free survival were performed including all randomized
patients, ie, according to intention-to-treat, 17-1A treatment again led to significant advantage
over the untreated group (Cox multivanate, P = .02, log-rank, P = .01, respectively). 


As most of the relapse events occur in the first 2 years after resection, it is not surprising that
the pattern of relapses did not show gross changes during the sixth and seventh years. When the two
groups were compared with regard to the site of first recurrence, the 7-year data similar to the
5-year analysis show that significantly fewer distant recurrences occur in patients treated with the
antibody than in the control arm (Fig 3). 


Since only acute and no chronic adverse effects were seen, the toxicity profile was not changed
during the last observation penod. 


In brief, after the first two infusions, antibody titers were low and reached their maximum only
after a fifth nfusion at 18 to 20 weeks after surgery, but remained detectable for 2 more years. 


As the 7-year median follow-up data confirm the previously reported 5-year findings, the conclusion
seems warranted that antibody treatment improves the chances of curatively operated patients. 


Thus, irradiation was applied to 11 patients of this group (two received preoperative, four
preoperative radiation and postoperative radiochemotherapy, and five postoperative radiation only). 


Interestingly, in the most recent report (median follow-up time, 6.5 years), adjuvant therapy with
fluorouracil plus levamisol administered to patients with Dukes' C colon cancer had only a minimal
effect on local recurrences. In that trial, only colon cancer patients were treated who were known
to have fewer local relapses than rectum cancer patients and were included in our trial. Therefore,
the less pronounced chemotherapeutic effect on local relapses may be due to the difference in
patient populations.


The dose of antibody chosen deserves a special comment. 


Why only one third of the patients at risk have responded to the antibody treatment may be explained
by variations in accessibility, vulnerability, and/or antigen expression in individual disseminated
tumor cells. 


Two major trials using the 17-1A antibody with the same dose and similar regimen are currently under
way to test this question in colon cancer patients. 


In conclusion, the presented results still support the original hypothesis that minimal residual
disease occurring so frequently in patients with sohd tumors appears to be an indication for
antibody therapy.
