An open-label dose comparison study of
ondansetron for the prevention of emesis
associated with chemotherapy prior to
bone marrow transplantation


Abstract Nausea and vomiting are
significant side effects in bone marrow
transplant (BMT) patients who
receive high-dose preparative regimens.
Higher than conventional
ondansetron doses and continuous infusion
might improve emetic control,
because of the high doses and combinations
of chemotherapy (CT) used in
this setting. Our objective was to conduct
a prospective, randomized study
comparing two different administration
methods of high-dose ondansetron
during a BMT preparative regimen
in breast cancer patients. Patients
were eligible if they were nonpregnant
women over 18 but under 65
years of age, undergoing highly
emetogenic CT in preparation for autologous
BMT. All patients received
ondansetron as an intermittent
(INT=24 mg i.v. q 12 h/day) or continuous
intravenous infusion (CIV=8
mg i.v. loading dose followed by a
continuous infusion of 2 mg/h per
day). A total of 66 patients were enrolled
in the study (n=34, INT; n=32,
CIV). There was no statistical difference
between treatment groups in the
worst grade of emesis for the entire
study period (P=0.49). Greater than 90% of all patients were graded as
failures (³5 emetic episodes or need
for rescue antiemetics). Complete
control (no vomiting episodes) and
complete plus major control (1–2
emetic episodes) per day ranged from
8% to 85% and 11% to 91%, respectively.
There was no significant difference
between the treatment arms in:
grade of emesis, episodes of vomiting
and retching, nausea scores, and mean
number of rescue medications administered.
There were no differences in
efficacy when high-dose ondansetron
was given as CIV or INT for the control
of nausea and vomiting in breast
cancer patients undergoing high-dose
CT for autologous BMT. Ondansetron
alone was not adequate to provide
sustained control of CT-induced nausea
and vomiting over the entire 5-
day study period. A combination of
antiemetics targeting various mechanisms
of CT-induced nausea and vomiting
may be necessary to improve response
rates.
Introduction
Nausea and vomiting are significant side effects in bone
marrow transplant (BMT) patients who receive high-dose
preparative regimens. Owing to the higher doses of chemotherapy
given in preparation for BMT and to the combinations
of agents administered, chemotherapy-based preparative
regimens have the potential to produce more nausea
and vomiting than high-dose cisplatin. In one series,
nausea and vomiting was reported in 100% of BMT patients. In another series of autologous BMT patients,
Antman et al. observed moderate to severe nausea and
vomiting despite the administration of prophylactic antiemetics . Because of the success rate of ondansetron
in controlling cisplatin-induced nausea and vomiting,
its use has been evaluated in the BMT setting.
Most studies evaluating ondansetron for BMT preparative
regimens prior to the initiation of this study were
small and nonrandomized [6, 8, 19, 25]. Overall response
rates in these chemotherapy-based preparative regimens
ranged from 9% to 82%, with complete responses varying
from 9% to 67%. Dosing regimens varied from intermittent
doses (0.15 mg/kg q 2 h´3 daily doses) to continuous
infusions (1–3 mg/h) preceded by loading doses of 8–12
mg.
Several European studies evaluated ondansetron administered
as an i.v. loading dose (8–12 mg i.v.) followed
by continuous infusion of 1–4 mg/h (daily ondansetron
dose ranged from 32 to 108 mg) in non-BMT patients receiving
cisplatin-based chemotherapy. Complete plus
major response rates (0–2 emetic episodes) were similar
(50–60%) over the entire dosage range. Marty et al. observed
similar response rates between a single 32-mg i.v.
dose and an 8-mg i.v. loading dose followed by a 1 mg/h
continuous infusion of ondansetron in acute cisplatin-induced
nausea and vomiting (76% vs 72% complete or major
response in the single dose arm vs the continuous infusion
arm).
Despite the similar results observed regarding both the
method of ondansetron administration (bolus vs continuous
infusion) and the actual dosage administered (1 vs up
to 4 mg/h), it was believed that higher than conventional
ondansetron dosage regimens and, perhaps, continuous administration
might be needed in the BMT setting. This is
due to the higher than standard doses and the combinations
of chemotherapy utilized, and also to the known variances
in emetogenicity patterns. To date, no dose-limiting
adverse events have been reported with ondansetron.
Although many institutions utilize ondansetron in the
prevention of nausea and vomiting associated with preparative
regimens prior to BMT, minimal data existed upon
initiation of this study on the appropriate dose and schedule
of ondansetron in this setting. Data from a large, randomized
trial were needed to determine an efficacious
dosing method of ondansetron in BMT patients and to assess
the safety of higher doses. We wanted to evaluate a
patient population receiving the same chemotherapy drugs
(and hence the same emetogenic potential) on the same
schedule to avoid difficulty in interpretation of results.
Therefore, our objective was to conduct a prospective, randomized,
non-blinded, controlled study comparing two
different administration methods for high-dose
ondansetron during a BMT preparative regimen in breast
cancer patients.
Patients and methods
Patients were eligible for participation in this IRB-approved study if
they met the following criteria: more than 18 but less than 65 years
of age; non-pregnant female, with a histologically confirmed diagnosis of breast cancer, undergoing high-dose chemotherapy in preparation
for autologous bone marrow transplantation; and provision of
written informed consent.
Patients were excluded for the following reasons: a Karnofsky
performance status of <60%; chronic nausea and/or vomiting or nausea
and/or vomiting of other etiologies, including, but not limited to:
gastric outlet obstruction, increased intracranial pressure or brain
metastases; documented vomiting or retching episodes or uncontrolled
nausea in the 12 h prior to the first dose of i.v. ondansetron;
radiation therapy administered as part of the preparative regimen; or
medications with known or potential antiemetic activity administered
in the 12 h prior to the initiation of i.v. ondansetron. The restricted
medications included benzodiazepines, butyrophenones, corticosteroids,
cannabinoids, phenothiazines, antihistamines, tricyclic
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, metoclopramide, trimethobenzamide,
scopolamine, fluoxetine, dipravan, paroxetine and
sertraline. Patients were also excluded if they required any of the restricted
medications during the study period. Benzodiazepines other
than lorazepam were allowed both 24 h prior to and during the study,
but only when used for indications such as anxiety or to induce
sleep. Premedications for transfusions, such as diphenhydramine or
hydrocortisone, were not excluded.
All patients received a preparative regimen consisting of cyclophosphamide
1500 mg/m2 i.v. q 24 h´4 doses, thio-TEPA 125 mg/m2
i.v. q 24 h´4 doses and carboplatin 200 mg/m2 i.v. q 24 h´4 doses
(Fig. 1). All three chemotherapy agents were administered as a continuous
infusion from day –7 through day –4. Recently, Hesketh et
al. classified the acute emetogenicity of antineoplastic agents.
According their guidelines, the emetogenic potential of cyclophosphamide
or carboplatin as a single agent was graded as a level 4
(60–90% emesis frequency without effective antiemetic prophylaxis;
Fig. 1). Although thio-TEPA’s emetogenicity is not ranked by
Hesketh et al. [14], the formula he proposed to rank the emetogenicity
of combination chemotherapy indicates the maximum level 5
(>90% emesis frequency without effective antiemetic prophylaxis)
for this regimen.
Antiemetic therapy
Upon enrollment, patients were randomized to either an intermittent
(INT) or a continuous intravenous infusion (CIV) ondansetron regimen
using a 1:1 block randomization scheme. Ondansetron was administered
as 24 mg i.v. q 12 h on each day of chemotherapy for the
INT arm, or as an 8-mg i.v. loading dose on day 1 only, followed by
a continuous infusion at 2 mg/h per day on each day of chemotherapy
for the CIV arm. Ondansetron therapy was initiated 30 min before
the first dose of chemotherapy for both study arms. For the INT
regimen, doses were administered over 15 min in 50 ml of normal
saline for injection (NS). The 8 mg loading dose was administered
over 15 min in 50 ml of NS.
Clinical assessment
Patients provided a medical history and medication history and underwent
a complete physical examination at the time of screening. The history included a review of demographic information and historical
status of cancer. Laboratory analysis, including blood chemistries,
was conducted within 24 h before and after the study.
An episode of vomiting was defined as expulsion of any stomach
contents through the mouth. An episode of retching was defined as
an attempt to vomit that was unproductive of stomach contents. An
emetic episode was defined as a single vomit or retch or any number
of continuous vomits and/or retches. Continuous vomiting and/or
retching was defined as two or more vomits and/or retches within 1
min of each other. Nausea was assessed by a numerical visual analogue
scale ranging from 0 to 100 mm, with 0 mm representing no
nausea and 100 mm representing the worst nausea ever experienced.
Patients were asked at each 24-h interval, from day 1 of chemotherapy
(day –7) through 24 h after completion of chemotherapy (day –2),
to rate the degree of nausea experienced over the last 24 h. Patients,
assisted by nurses when necessary, were responsible for recording
the number of vomits and retches. Control of emesis was graded daily
for each 24-h period as complete (zero emetic episodes); major
(one to two emetic episodes); minor (three to four emetic episodes)
and failure (five or more emetic episodes or the requirement of rescue
therapy). The need for rescue therapy was left to the discretion
of the patient and/or investigator. At the end of each 24-h period of
therapy, emetic episodes were graded. If the patient required rescue
therapy on 1 day, the day was graded as a failure; however, she was
eligible for the next day of therapy. The number and frequency of
rescue medications were documented.
Patients could be withdrawn from the study at any time at the investigator’s
discretion or their own request. Possible reasons for discontinuation
included: unacceptable side effects associated with the
study drug, discontinuation of chemotherapy because of changes in
the patient’s underlying disease status, and an unacceptable level of
nausea and/or vomiting during the study. Patients were allowed to
receive rescue medications for nausea and or vomiting if requested.
Clinical analysis
Each patient was evaluated as having been a “success” or “failure.”
Success was defined as complete control, major control (1–2 emetic
episodes), or minor control (3–4 emetic episodes). A failure was defined
as 5 or more emetic episodes or a requirement for rescue therapy.
The proportion of successes and failures in each arm for each day
of the study was compared. Nausea scores, number of vomits, and
number of retches were also compared between study groups. The
percentage of patients requiring rescue antiemetics and the number
of rescue antiemetic doses administered each day were evaluated.
The incidence of adverse effects were recorded.
Statistical analysis
Statistical analysis was performed using a Chi-square test or a Fisher’s
exact test when comparing means. A Fisher’s exact test was used if half of the cells had expected counts less than 5, which
makes the Chi-square test invalid. The Wilcoxon signed-rank test
was used for nonparametric variables. The t-test was used to compare
means for demographic data and number of rescue medications.
The study had approximately a 70% power to detect a 30% difference
in efficacy between the two arms (a 15% success rate with one
group compared with a 45% success rate in the other group). Differences
were considered to be statistically significant at P£0.05.
Results
Sixty-six non-chemotherapy-naive patients were enrolled
in the study from January 1994 through October 1995.
Two patients in the INT arm withdrew because of intractable
headaches. Data were analyzed for these two patients
up until the time they withdrew from the study (day –5
and day –4). There were no significant differences in study
results (data not shown) whether the remaining results
were included or not. Thirty-four patients were randomized
to INT ondansetron and 32 to CIV ondansetron. Mean
age, age range, ethnicity and disease status were evenly
distributed between treatment arms, as illustrated in Table 1.
Means were compared with a t-test, and categorical variables
were compared with the Chi-square test. The only
significant difference (P=0.05) detected between treatment
arms in Table 1 was the mean age. This difference was not
felt to be clinically significant.
The worst grade of emesis was determined for each patient
over the entire study period. There was no statistical
difference between treatment groups in the worst grade of
emesis (P=0.49, 2-tail Fisher’s exact test). All 32 (100%)
patients in the CIV arm and 32 (94%) patients in the INT
arm had failure as their worst grade of emesis. Two (6%)
patients in the INT arm had complete control of emesis
throughout the study. Figure 2 illustrates the percentage of
patients experiencing success (complete, major, or minor
control) of emesis control per day. There was no significant
difference between treatment arms in grade of emesis
per day for the entire study period. The complete control and complete plus major control of emesis per day ranged
from 8% to 85% and 11% to 91%, respectively.
Table 2 illustrates the median numbers of vomits and
retches and the nausea score per day. No significant differences
were detected between study arms for these three
variables. Documentation of the number of retches was
poor, with only 43% of 386 possible values recorded.
Vomiting and nausea scores were missing in 5% and 24%,
respectively.
From day –7 through day –2, the INT group received a
mean (±SEM) of 11.9 (±1.4) rescue medications and the
CIV group received a mean (±SEM) of 14.4 (±1.9) rescue
medications (P=0.30). There was no statistical difference
in the mean number of rescue medications administered
between treatment groups (P=0.30). Figure 3 demonstrates
the percentages of patients requiring rescue antiemetics
each day. There were no significant differences noted between
study arms. Additionally, no significant differences
were detected in the median number of rescue antiemetic
doses administered per day (range 0–4). The most common
rescue antiemetics used as single agents were
lorazepam and prochlorperazine. When more than one antiemetic
was used per day, either lorazepam plus
prochlorperazine or lorazepam plus diphenhydramine and
haloperidol was prescribed. The third most common antiemetic
combination utilized was lorazepam, diphenhydramine,
and haloperidol. Although antihistamines were restricted during this
study, several patients received one or more antihistamine
doses during the study period (most often for itching or
sleep). Of the 2 patients who had an overall CR rate, 1 had
received diphenhydramine and 1 had not. Other medications
from the restricted list (i.e., nortriptyline and sertraline)
were also inadvertently administered for treatment
of nonrelated ailments. However, exclusion of these patients
did not affect statistical analysis and study outcomes.
The most common adverse effects occurring during the
study period are outlined in order of decreasing frequency
in Table 3. Diarrhea was most common, followed by headache
and elevated transaminases. The majority of the elevated
transaminases were grade 0 (<2´normal) or grade 1
(2–5´normal). Other common adverse effects included
constipation, musculoskeletal pain, indigestion and pruritis.
There were no significant differences in the incidence
of side effects between treatment groups. It was interesting
to note that although the incidence of constipation was not
statistically different (P=0.53) at 12% vs 31% for the INT
and CIV arms, respectively, this finding may be clinically
significant. Other adverse effects occurring in less than
5% of patients included: chest pain, shortness of breath,
tachycardia, cough, hiccups and syncope. No extrapyramidal
symptoms were reported. Owing to the complexity of
drug regimens prescribed in the BMT setting, it is difficult to attribute many of these side effects directly to
ondansetron. For example, BMT preparative regimens can
also be associated with diarrhea, elevated transaminases
and congestion.
Discussion
During the entire study period, almost all patients (62/64)
had 1 or more days rated as a failure for grade of emesis.
No significant differences in efficacy or toxicity were detected
between the CIV and INT ondansetron groups.
Evaluation of these results by study day did not show significant
differences between the two study arms. Similarly,
Lazarus et al. recently compared bolus and continuous infusion
granisetron (10 mcg/kg per day) in combination
with dexamethasone in 43 BMT patients and found no significant
differences in emetic control [20]. This study confirms
our study results and suggests there are no advantages
of continuous infusion 5HT3 antagonists over intermittent
bolus doses.
Our success rates were high on the 1st day of chemotherapy
(day –7), at 97% and 88% for the INT and CIV
arms, respectively (Fig. 2). Interestingly, the success rate
dropped to 56% and 50%, respectively, for the 2nd day of
chemotherapy (day –6), and continued to decline to approximately
a third of patients having success of emesis
control on day –5. By the last 2 days of the study period
(day –3 and –2), success rates ranged from only 10% to
16%. Barbonis et al. and Frakes et al. also identified a decline
in emesis control from the 1st day of chemotherapy
to the last day of chemotherapy administration. The
inability to sustain high levels of emetic control beyond
day 1 of chemotherapy suggests that nonserotonergic
mechanisms associated with nausea and vomiting may
contribute significantly from day 2 onward. Therefore,
combinations of antiemetic agents with different
mechanisms of action may be necessary for improved control
of emesis. Many studies have demonstrated that a serotonin
antagonist in combination with dexamethasone
yields better emesis control than a serotonin antagonist
alone. Steroids were excluded in this study by
other investigational protocols and the concern of increased
infection risk. However, Crenier et al. compared
ondansetron (8 mg i.v. q.d.-b.i.d.), granisetron (3 mg i.v.
q.d.-b.i.d.), and tropisetron (5 mg i.v. q.d.) with or without
dexamethasone in 34 patients receiving peripheral blood
stem cell transplantation. Overall, ondansetron and
granisetron were more effective than tropisetron for controlling
emesis, but the best control occurred when these
agents were used in combination with dexamethasone. The
addition of a third prophylactic antinausea medication may
also be necessary in the BMT setting.
When interpreting the success rates in our study, it is
important to consider the actual number of vomits and
retches that occurred per day. Failure was defined as either
five or more emetic episodes per day or the need for one
or more doses of rescue antiemetic therapy. The median number of vomits and retches per day was below five
throughout the entire study period (Table 2). Although the
percentage of patients receiving rescue antiemetics was
less than 10% on the initial day of chemotherapy, this
number increased over the next 2 days of chemotherapy
and plateaued such that approximately 80% of patients required
rescue antiemetics during the last 3 days of the
study period (Fig. 3). Of those patients requiring rescue
antiemetics, the median number of doses administered per
day ranged from zero to 4 over the study period. Therefore,
the majority of failures occurring in our study were
due to the requirement for rescue antiemetics and not because
patients experienced five or more emetic episodes.
When chemotherapy is given over multiple days, both
an acute phase (occurring within 24 h of chemotherapy)
and a delayed phase (occurring 24–72 h after chemotherapy)
of nausea and vomiting may occur. For example, on
day 3 (day –5) of the preparative regimen utilized for this
study, patients probably experienced both “acute” nausea
and vomiting from the chemotherapy agents administered
on day 3 (day –5), and “delayed” nausea and vomiting
from cyclophosphamide administered on days 1 and 2
(days –7 and –6). The addition of dexamethasone and/or
metoclopramide may help control the delayed phase of
nausea and vomiting. Anticipatory nausea and vomiting,
a conditioned response resulting from poor control of
emesis with previous chemotherapy, may also contribute.
Lorazepam may be effective in minimizing this type of
nausea and vomiting. Other potential mechanisms to
target may include the effect of chemotherapy metabolites
on the central and enteric nervous systems as well as disruption
of gut motility.
Nausea score assessments based on the 100-mm visual
analogue scale ranged from a median of 0 on the first day
of chemotherapy to a maximum median of 46 on day –3
(Table 2). Beginning with the 2nd day of chemotherapy, at
least 1 patient reported a daily nausea score of 98 or higher.
These results are similar to the low success rates for
emesis control discussed above and support the need for
additional antiemetic therapy in combination with
ondansetron. The mechanism of nausea is related to that
for vomiting, but has different characteristics. Dexamethaone
has demonstrated some efficacy for control of
delayed nausea and its addition to this antiemetic regimen
might have improved outcomes. The missing values
for number of vomits, number of retches, and nausea score
emphasize the difficulty of conducting an antiemetic clinical
trial. As the study progressed and patients became
sicker, the compliance rate for completing study forms declined.
Overall, response rates in our study did not differ significantly
from trials using more standard doses of
ondansetron. Agura et al. found similar results when he
compared two dose levels of ondansetron (0.1 mg/kg LD
followed by 0.035 mg/kg per h vs 0.2 mg/kg LD followed
by 0.07 mg/kg per h) with metoclopramide plus droperidol
in 60 BMT patients. Ondansetron provided better emesis
control than metoclopramide plus droperidol; however, on the day of worst emesis control, the low-dose
ondansetron provided significantly better control than the
high-dose ondansetron. This study also suggests that higher
doses of 5HT3 receptor antagonists may not be necessary
in the BMT population.
Although several other antiemetic studies in BMT patients
have been reported since the initiation of this trial, it
is difficult to compare them because: (1) patient populations
vary with respect to history of prior chemotherapy
exposure, (2) preparative regimens differ in combinations
of drugs used, inclusion or exclusion of radiation therapy,
and in the schedule of drug administration, (3) antiemetic
combinations, dosages and duration of administration are
not consistent, and (4) definitions of outcomes are not
standardized. Table 4 outlines several of these trials. Overall,
response rates were similar to or within the range of
our study. However, overall control of emesis had a wider
range in our study than seen in other studies. This may
have been due to the limitation of excluding dexamethasone
as a component of the antiemetic regimen. The effect
of gender should also be considered. The incidence and severity
of nausea and vomiting is higher in women, so
that the results of this study performed in breast cancer patients should be evaluated with caution when they are
compared with those of studies in other BMT populations.
Conclusions
There were no differences between ondansetron given as a
continuous infusion (8 mg LD i.v., then 2 mg/h i.v.) or intermittent
bolus dosing (24 mg i.v. b.i.d.) for the control of
nausea and vomiting in breast cancer patients undergoing
autologous BMT. Ondansetron as a single agent was not
adequate to sustain the control seen on day 1 of chemotherapy-
induced nausea and vomiting in this population. A
combination of antiemetics targeting various mechanisms
of chemotherapy-induced nausea and vomiting may be
necessary to improve response rates. Additional study of
various combinations of antiemetics in BMT recipients is
needed to help determine the most efficacious regimen in
these patients.