

Adjuvant chemotherapy for soft tissue sarcoma is controversial because previous trials reported
conflicting results. The present study was designed with restricted selection criteria and high
dose-intensities of the two most active chemotherapeutic agents. 


Patients and Methods.Patients between 18 and 65 years of age with grade 3 to 4 spindle-cell sarcomas
(primary diameter >= 5 cm or any size recurrent tumor) in extremities or girdles were eligible. 


Their natural history is partially known and clinical decisions rely on a few simple and
well-recognized prognostic factors such as size, grading, and location.


The treatment of limb sarcomas mainly relies on a combined-modality approach, after the
demonstration that pre-or postoperative radiation and conservative surgery led to local control in a
high proportion of patients.4 In fact, limb-sparing procedures allow an 85% to 90% local
dis-ease-free survival (DFS) rate and demolitive surgery now represents only 5% to 10% of the
operations in comparison with the 50% survival rate of the 1960s to 1970s.


The main findings were statistical evidence in favor of chemotherapy for local, metastasis, and
overall DFS (P = .016, .0003, and .0001, respectively) and a trend towards increased OS (P = .12). 


Not one new study has been already reported, whereas the present Italian co-operative study closed
patient accrual in November 1996 because of the results of the planned interim analysis.


After a positive biopsy for sarcoma, all patients underwent complete staging and programmed local
treatment. The patients who satisfied all the selection criteria were then stratified and
subsequently randomized to a control or chemotherapy group. 


Inclusion criteria were as follows, age, 18 to 65 years, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status less than or equal to 2, primary tumors subfascially localized with diameter
greater than or equal to 5 cm, high-grade spindle-cell or polymorphous sarcomas (fibrosarcoma,
malignant fibrous histiocytoma, polymorphous liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma,
malignant schwannoma, angiosarcoma, and polymorphous rhabdomyosarcoma), local relapse of any size,
no previous radio/chemotherapy, adequate bone marrow (WBC count of >= 4,000/fiL, platelets =
120.000/mL, and hemoglobin >= 10 g/dL), renal (creatinine <= 1.3 mg/dL), hepatic (SGOT <= 2.5 X
normal value and bilirubin <= 1.2 mg/dL), and pulmonary functions.   Exclusion criteria were as
follows, distant or regional lymph-node metastases, previous malignancy, medical or psychiatric
illness precluding correct written informed consent, pregnancy, uncontrolled infections, and risk of
being lost to follow-up. 


Radical surgery consisted of amputation in case of massive involvement of critical structures or
compartmental resection in highly selected patients. Preoperative radiation therapy (44.8 Gy in 28
fractions in 2.5 weeks, 160 cGy/ fraction, 2 fractions per day) followed by resection with or
without a post-or intraoperative boost (16 to 18 Gy for positive or close surgical margins) was used
for tumors extending to critical structures for which conservative surgical resection was expected
to be inadequate and amputation would usually have to be performed to obtain negative margins. 


In the case of incomplete hematologic recovery (defined as WBC < 4,000/mL and platelets [PLTS] <
100.000/mL), treatment was postponed by one or more weeks, furthermore, on complete hematologic
recovery, a dose reduction of EPI was applied depending on the observed nadirs (WBC > 1,000/mL and
PLTS > 75.000/mL, IFO and EPI doses both 100%, WBC > 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and
EPI dose 75%, WBC < 500/mL and PLTS < 50.000/mL, IFO dose 100% and EPI dose 50%). 


All centers faxed protocol-specific eligibility checklists to the statistics office in Aviano,
patients were stratified using a four-block stratification by primary tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >=
10 cm) and recurrent tumor (diameter < 10 cm v >= 10 cm) and randomized to treatment or control
groups. 


The intensities of local recurrences and of distant (with or without simultaneous local) recurrences
were estimated by the cumulative incidence function (CIF) approach to the analysis of competing
risks.14 The Wilcoxon rank sum test was used to test the hypothesis of equality of the distribution
of some covariates in the two treatment groups. 


Seven patients (13%) did not start adjuvant treatment. 


One patient refused the fifth and last cycle for personal reasons, and three patients did not
complete the treatment because of related toxicities (reappearance of viral uveitis, consecutive
episodes of pneumonitis, and persistent leukopenia) after two, three, and four cycles, respectively.
The mean administered doses of the fifth cycle (94 mg of EPI and 8,156 mg of IFO) were slightly
lower than those of the fourth cycle (95.5 mg of EPI and 8,257 mg of IFO). The average median
relative dose-intensity (DI) of the program was 83.3% (Table 2), 63% of the cycles were given at a
DI of >= 80% and 48% at a DI of >= 90%. 


From the third cycle, grade 4 leukopenia and thrombocytopenia were less frequent because of the
applied dose reductions, and anemia became the most important hematologic side effect, requiring
repeated packed red cell transfusions in 24% of the patients. 


The nonhematologic toxicities were reversible alopecia (100% of cases), grade 3 mucositis (10% of
cases), and grade 3 nausea and vomiting (3% of cases). 


During the follow-up period, disease recurrences were recorded in 28 of the 53 treated patients and
in 32 of the 51 patients who did not undergo adjuvant therapy, 20 treated patients and 28 untreated
patients died. 


Univariate analyses did not reveal any statistically significant difference in overall DFS and OS
for any of the characteristics considered (age, sex, center of surgery, histology, grading, site of
primary tumor, presentation, diameter, local treatment, and stratification) with the exception of
adjuvant treatment (data not shown). 


Because none of the patient characteristics was associated with the end point at the time of
univariate analysis, unadjusted hazard ratios (HR) and their 95% confidence intervals (CI) were
computed by means of the Cox proportional hazards model. 


The absolute improvement deriving from chemotherapy was 27% at 2 years (72% and 45% in the treatment
and control arms, respectively, P = .003), and 13% at 4 years (50% and 37%, respectively, P = .19)
(Table 5). 


The cumulative incidence function estimates at 2 years were 0% and 10% for the treatment and the
control arms, respectively (P = .02), and at 4 years, they were 6% and 17%, respectively (P = .09)
(Table 5). 


Taking into account the overall local relapse rate (all local events observed), 11 patients in the
control group and nine in the treatment group experienced local failure. 


Metastasis-Free Survival.Six additional patients (four in the control arm and two in the treatment
arm) had a distant metastasis as a second relapse after a local relapse. 


The preliminary data of previous studies were sometimes positive for DFS and OS,15-19 but further
analyses, made after an adequate follow-up time, indicated a disappearance of the positive effect of
chemotherapy on 20,21 and, in some cases, worse results.22 However, the recently published
meta-analysis,7 involving 1,568 patients, showed a statistically significant benefit for treated
patients of 6%, 10%, and 10% for local, metastatic, and overall DFS, respectively, and a favorable
(but not statistically significant) trend in OS (4%), after a median of 9.4 years of follow-up. 


In fact, disease stages, tumor sizes, and grading varied greatly.23 Second, eight studies made use
of a polychemotherapy including an anthracycline, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, and dacarbazine,
but only the first is active in soft tissue sarcomas, the others probably increased toxicity. 


Although these first-generation trials are no longer the gold standards, the meta-analysis did
reveal a number of elements that suggested a positive role of adjuvant chemotherapy. Furthermore,
these studies did not use IFO, which is now recognized as an active agent in this disease.24-26 In
addition to the inclusion of IFO, the recent introduction of hematopoietic growth factors has
allowed an increase in the doses and dose-intensity without negatively affecting patient safety. 


This maximum-tolerated dose gave 13 responses of 13 assessable patients, but induced relevant
toxicities.31 Therefore, in the present study, the age of the patients was limited to 65 years, the
number of cycles was limited to five, and a predefined dose reduction scheme was established to
reduce the dose of anthracycline depending on the level of leukopenia reached during the previous
cycle. 


The serial hematologic evaluations made during the median follow-up of 3 years confirmed the
complete recovery of hematopoietic functions. 


The protocol methodology included an interim analysis after half of the predefined patient
population was randomized. 


Therefore, the observation time of a given study population could be misleading, as reported for
some of the first-generation trials.20,21 
